Welcome students to our 2nd video on the anti hypertensive agents. We will be talking about the calcium channel blockers and the beta blockers, dr. goldstein, speaking Please contact me if you'd like to talk pharmacology. Here are learning objectives. The idea is to put all of these things together into a concept on how to use the drugs safely in our individual patients and to know what are the potential adverse effects drug interactions and who should not get these drugs. Here are they required preparation materials to scholar or expert? There's one in this case and the practice questions. All of the rest are available to help you if you wish to use them. And that includes the videos And here are the links. And if you'd rather just read the list of what I need to know, it's on the power point for part one, the ras inhibitors. So let's begin whether l type calcium channel blockers or c, C bees. They're separated into 2 big groups, the non di repair rating, and the die and repair again. And then there are a couple that are given intravenously. So I've indicated that students should know both of these by name because you're bound to see them and your clinical rotations for the non di, harder parity. That's the verapamil and l tiresome, they actually have function on cardiac tissue. The di hydro parodying are oral, they accept the 2 that I mentioned. I have start and if that appeal, which was the 1st one to be developed and an lone appeal, they have important differences that will relate to how to think about calcium channel blockers for our individual patients. beginning with the pharmacokinetics. We'll take a look at the class properties There well absorbed. There may be 1st pass a panic effect. High plasma protein bounding summer. P glycoprotein substrate c Y, p mediated metabolism and varying halflife. And that's going to depend on the drug for these drugs that have short half lives there. They are available in extended release forms, and that can reduce the dosing frequency. So let's take a look at the ones that we selected for. The 9 diagram parodies are really only 2 in that group for up and mill and dell tire of them. We see they have adequate more oral bio availability. We see that they're both available also and I V form pretty high prep plasma protein binding, c, Y, p 3 for metabolism and differing plasma half lives. Both of these drugs are available in extended release forms, so the patient needs take them only twice or once a day. The die hard repair, deans, the fet appeal and I'm low to p, and I want to focus on that 1st adequate bio, availability, onset of action. Now in effect, a pain has very rapid onset, rapid onset and lower pain. Very slow to onset. Otherwise we see that pharmacokinetics are pretty similar except for the half life I fly from am low to pain is long the therapy as a short half life, the therapy and immediate release will therefore need to be taken more frequently during the day. But the it is available and along acting form that actually provides that slow release so that it doesn't pick up quickly. The car to pin is available only I V as is club in a pain. And that's the reason that clip been a pain in the car to pain are on this list was stars because of that I B formulation And the answer to action is minutes. So what would we be using these 4 crises, hypertensive crises, We have the C, Y, p 3 a for now the car to pain demonstrates that the principle of distribution, half life and terminal half life. So we see that it's distributed rapidly and therefore it's going to have A rapid drop in the half life Before it starts to level off. And this part here is called the alpha and the terminal is called the beta. So now I'll fly from about 3 minutes to beat out half life of about 45 minutes of the terminal health life. But after a long infusion, as the drug distribute sir up the tissues, the half life can be much longer. clarinet, a pin has a duration of action of about 5 to 15 minutes and a terminal half life of about 15 minutes. So that's a difference was club class, P I V, rapid onset, but the half life and the duration of action are much shorter, which is often desirable. Because once that blood pressure is brought down to a stable point and the I V is turned off, the effect needs to go away very rapidly. And many patients so that the benefit was, could repeat if that is the desired outcome, empower the motor pain is on here because it's of its special therapy reduce it is used for the management of sub arachnoid hemorrhage. So it is oral and we see or c, Y, p 3 or 4 in the short half life. So my bringing down the pressure in the brain for the management of the sub iraq night hemorrhage. I did not put a star on the motor pain. I do want to mention it because you may see it when you're in clinical practice. And it might say, I remember I heard about that somewhere. Basic concepts. Now. The extended release forms reduce the number of daily doses needed to maintain therapeutic drug levels. And that will likely improve patient adherents. So let's take a look in the philippine that is the prime example. It is the prototype of this and the not of the D H p, c, C, B group. So immediate release 3 times daily every 8 hours. But the extended release is once daily, and the immediate release is going to cause These peak so that's our, every 8 hours. This is 16 hours, this is 0. And as a result, these peaks can cause that drop in blood pressure Which can cause the character cardia. Now the extended release Looks more like this, much slower onset. And then because it's an extended release, it's going to either, depending on the product release drug at different points, keeping it within the therapeutic window. Or it might actually cause a sustain release. So it doesn't cause those same peaks because of that slow release device mechanism formulation that is in now am low to pain, which is the other one with the star on its own has slow absorption. It doesn't require that extended release formulation. It has the minimal peaks and troughs, so it stays within the therapy window without those peaks which are associated with, causing that reflex tac, cardia. And it has that prolonged effect. So it has these much more even blood levels. So we see that on a much better chart than the one I was drawing here, we have our short acting, rapid acting drug. It's rapid acting in short acting. So it acts rapidly and it's got a fairly short half life Then we have with the immediate release, this would be something like one that has to be taken twice a day. And then we have our sustain release. So this group gradually drops over 24 hour period. If it's being taken on a regular basis, another dose would be taken after 24 hours before it has an opportunity to drop to low and a 0 order release, the so called 0 order release. It will cause those sustained fairly even blood levels throughout the therapeutic range. The little basic pharmacokinetics principles there. And because we want to avoid that terika cardia, that comes with the high peaks. It is the slow release, the slow acting that are preferred. And this is a good chart that really shows you the difference between them. So let's take a look at the mechanism of action. The l type calcium channels are also known as slow channels and they have a long, large, high threshold. They are the dominant type in the vascular smooth muscle in the cardiac meyer sites in the final atrial node and the little tissue. So our non di hydro period in calcium channel blockers have a greater effect on our cardiac tissues than do our di hydro pairings are di, hydro parroting mainly cause arterial. These are dilation, the non die hard period periods are going to cause arterial days. These are dilation as well. They mediate the entry of the calcium into the cell. They induce calcium induced calcium release. Sounds redundant, but it's the calcium itself that isn't do thing the release from the circle plasma curriculum. And that's going to cause contraction of the smooth muscle and the cardiac muscle. And also they stimulate the node and conduction through the node. So the blockers are going to the blockers that act on cardiac tissue are going to have negative croner, tropic and negative. I know tropic effects This is just a picture to show you what's happening with our l type calcium channels on. On the left hand side of this picture. In the red arrows, basically it's just showing you the action of smooth muscle contraction. The drugs will passively diffuse through a membrane and we'll act on some point here on this alpha one sub unit They are from the inner side of the membrane. Are they bind more effectively to open channels and inactivated channels. And that may sound familiar to you because our local anesthetic, for example, also do the same thing. They block the inside and they are more effective on open channels and inactivated channels. drug binding reduces the frequency of the opening and response. And the polarization that causes a mark decrease in the trans membrane trans membrane calcium current. And therefore that is going to produce the Visa dilation. And for verapamil and tiresome reduction in contract realty and the negative i know tropic effect and the reduction of the velocity of the conduction through the node Does depend on the facts. As is true with most drugs, the non di hydro, parodying verapamil angle, tarzan decrease channels, rate of recovery channel block is enhanced by the frequency of stimulation. Perhaps no more so than bill tires and they depress the rate of the sinus node, pacemaker and slow a. The conduction now die hard repair dancer potent being so di leaders. And as a result they can cause that reflex tack a cardia. And that's why we want to use the slow release ones, which are much less likely to cause the reflex tac, cardia, and to a lesser degree they are more potent di, later than verapamil and del tires. And since when it comes to managing hypertension, what we want is a day so dilatory. In fact, the dye, hydro parodies, are 1st line are recommended agents which are not to say that non die hard repaired is don't work. They do, they do work for, for the management of hypertension. And this is just a little picture to maybe help you visualize and help you remember the actions of the drugs. hypertension, all 3 c b's, inertial or add on therapy. They relax the smooth muscle of the arterials decrease systemic vascular resistance, decreased blood pressure, hypertensive emergency than a car to paint and clear pain. Because of they are available intravenously. We do want to give a flu intravenous infusion to so we don't overshoot and cause that tac cardia. often given with le battle all which is an intravenous beta blocker. The D H p c C B 's because of that to block that reflects tarka cardia. The current pain, potent long acting and we see a longer duration, clipping really short half life and a short duration of acts. And that's the difference between them. And that's the reason to remember both of them because you'll, you'll see them and you and if anybody asks you, you'll be able to say this is the difference. useful for the management of angina, patrice, either initial or add on therapy, and it's going to depend on which type of angina they are 1st line for the reasons past. Again, join, but they're 2nd line for the exertion. All angina. beta blockers are the 1st line for the exertion of beta blockers should not be used for the reasons spastic type because they don't work. So what are, what is the concept here for management if what prevention really is, what we're using is calcium, channel bar lockers for prevention, not acute decrease. peripheral vascular resistance is going to decrease half the load, which is going to increase coronary blood flow, which is going to increase oxygen delivery to the mile cart in m. They can be used together with a beta blocker. The diameter parenting plus the beta blocker for combined effect and it will be more effective in either one alone or for patients who don't tolerate the beta blocker that it makes sense to use the non di hydro purity verapamil or delta ism Because of the negative ion a tropic and negative croner tropic effects. And you can see there are a number of different uses for the super of interpreted le bon tripler. tacking rhythm is these are class for bon williams, anti rhythmic. se for node works for some people, not for other people. Some rock noise, hemorrhage i mentioned before is a motor pain. It gets distributed into the cns, which is why it's used for it. migraine verapamil may prevent the migraine, but not widely used for that And a toko linux, so that will, it means that it will prevent or reduce pre mature contractions in late and early pregnancy or mid pregnancy. Really not early pregnancy. nefferno subpoena is the one that's been studied. The most coco letters are used only for 48 hours and the point is not to take the the woman to term, but to suppress the premature contractions only for 2 days in the event that pre term labor and in the event that the woman goes into labor early and the point is to give a gluco corticoid to promote Low match duration in the fetus to improve the chances that this premature baby will survive. Of course, a woman needs to be moved to a hospital. It has a neo natal. I see you. So that's talk a letter, it said a pain is the most studied, 48 hours only. And now moving to our adverse effects rate, a cardia, worsening cardiac output. Usually what the I V only. And that's with the non hired repair into, to actually have cardiac actions. constipation can be a big deal with verapamil. And many of these patients are older constipation is a problem to begin with. And this just makes it worse. peripheral bmo with didn't die hydra purities and I want to talk about this mechanism because dyer, red x will not improve it. This is not really related to volume visa, dilation of the arterials. And remember, these drugs only act on arteries and arterials. Not on the venue. olsen, veins. So that causes this pre capillary dilation. And in turn, a post capillary reflex construction can occur. And that's going to increase the capillary pressure as the arterials dilated. But the venue all is constricted and as a result, that's going to increase permeability through that capillary. And that can cause leakage. And d ma, and this is going to be seen in the lower extremities. Because of gravity and feet. The immediate release because of those high peaks, rapid high pigs headache, flushing and dizziness And that hyper tension, that results also because of the arterial diesel dilation can lead to reflex tac, cardia. As a result of the sympathetic compensatory response. Now there are calcium l type calcium channels also in the soft deal gastric sphincter. And that can cause relaxation of that sphincter. And as a result, that can lead to gastro soften to reflex, which in turn could lead to gastro soften to reflex disease over time. But in patient 2 already haggard, that can even, that can aggravate contra indications. Well, ab blocker or a severe ventricular dysfunction can occur if the drug is given with a beta blocker, but this is seen most frequently with intravenous. So the verapamil is already reducing conduction through the node, and the beta blocker also reduces conduction through the node. And as a result, secondly to Something called heart block which is just that lock of conduction through the ab node. verapamil or del fires And patients with in tripler dysfunction already a problem as they are ab nodal conduction disturbances or very low blood pressure because we know they cause a drop in blood pressure. Miss philippines, immediate release, contr indications not. So for the slow release, the fed opinion has been used for blink only by opening up those capitals and squeezing the contents of the liquid inside those capitals squeezing the contents under the tongue. And that should not be done for patients who have and join us. It and certainly not for patients who has an F T elevation myocardial infarction. Patients were unstable angina, that tac cardio can lead to the bio cardio infarction. That abrupt nasal dilation and fed up ensured acting formulations are not appropriate in Long term treatment, angina or hypertension. We want to use this low release formulation wrap or mel plus de jackson can lead to de jackson toxicity and patient may be honest in the hospital that has to be monitored very closely. verapamil blocks p glycoprotein to Jackson is a substrate of p glycoprotein to Jackson enters the kidneys through p glycoprotein, the jocks and enters the systemic circulation through gut. So if we block that p glycoprotein more is going to get into the systemic circulation. If we block it in the kidney, more is going to be in the sick and the circulation. And we know that the doctor has a really narrow therapeutic window, lowest reputed index. So that blood level can increase significantly the risk of arrhythmia due to elevated levels of the jackson. So it's not a good combination for app milling quantity can cause excess of hypertension. And patients with video panic, pathic, hypertrophic, some in order to notice or a particular risk for this hypertension, hypotension course are c Y, p and p like a protein mediated interactions and other drugs that do the same job or have the same toxicities. Moving now to our beta blockers, a very big category of drugs. The ones that I have starred have important pharmaca, kinetic and pharma, called dynamic differences and or, and are commonly used in clinical practice. This is just to show you the similarity instructors here we have are epinephrine and as you can see, the others have very similar act as similar structures. Here's our iso procuring all which is an agonist. You could see how closely related that one is and in 3 dimensional space, these would look similar, but instead of activating the beta receptors, it blocks them. beta blockers are competitive antagonists of norepinephrine and different. So if you know what's happening in the sympathetic nervous system, physiologically, you'll be able to understand what beta blockers are doing. And this is just to remind you of our sympathetic nervous system actions. beta receptors are g S P c, ours. So that's what we're blocking. They're all, they're all g, S, P c or a beta one, beta 2 and beta 3. They have different functions based on their particular distribution. In the cell types. These are the stimulating effects that are being blocked by beta blockers. Sign away real know the atria, the a B no that has proclaimed the system in the ventricles. So you can see these are cardiac functions, but also the beta one receptors are in the just just sickle mariel or cells. So blocking them blocks, sympathetic induced, renan relief, sympathetic induced, made it to respond to the Visa dilation that predominates, predominates. And that just to remind you about the physiology, beta to receptors are distributed in a skeletal muscle of which air is in great amount of vascular you're in the skeletal muscle and therefore activation and needed to receptors leads to the diesel dilation. So those are the actions that can be blocked by beta blockers. The action on the vascular tor, the made a tooth. And the action on the cardiac receptors is made one and beta twos, but there's much less distribution of beta twos in the cardiac tissues. And don't forget and the just glue mariel herself. So this is just a picture to help remind you about where these drugs are working. Take a look at the drugs per pat panel of so many of these we have our classical non selective beta blockers. We ever selected blue beta blockers, and then we have our beta blockers that do they have other actions as well, both non selective group and selective group. So what are we talking with the selective group that's beta one. So let's take a look at our classical non selective propranolol is the prototype of this group and you'll see all the different effects. I'm not asking you to memorize any of this. Just remember that propranolol is a prototype and a classical non selective beta blocker. It has a short half life, but it does come in the extended release versions. The beta one selective beta blockers. There are 5 of them. The only one I want you to remember is an overall also pronounced prolaw. And it comes in a longer acting version. So it's twice a day and the original version want to be in the longer acting version. And asthma law, they take away message was as small as this is I V because o R. I circled the wrong thing here. This is the half law firm top rule, not the half life is only 9 minutes for small, very short half life and a very short duration of action when the drug is withdrawn. So this obviously is given by infusion In order to maintain the blood levels for the amount of time that's needed. So that's going to be management of a crisis situation, an emergency situation And made a blockers 3rd generation. Now this means they have other actions. So for example, i'll show you that on the next slide. So these are the 3, these are non selective. beta blockers, both beta one beta to action and they have differing half lives. So the beta lol Has about 5 hours le made a lol is frequently used also because it's available. I V matoney for all also ivy. So the metal on metal for all are are really widely used for the management of, of emergent blood pressure issues. So what are these other actions that we talk about? I want to point to middle offers. So is the beta one beta 2. So it's non selective and it's got this alpha one receptor antagonism. Remember that the alpha one receptors are on them to ask you, which are when we're thinking about blood pressure. So that's going to cause the cardiac flowing and visa dilation. Same thing with car battle, all carvette, all also blocks ultra calcium channels per metal, also has andy oxygen activity, if that's relevant, that hasn't really been defined, cartoon will all nitric oxide production. So what do we think about was nitric oxide? Also base dilation And as a made a to receptor agonist, not an antagonist, we saw with the non selective beta blockers, a block beta one and made it to cartoons law actually has some agonist action on beta 2 receptors. So remember, that's a Visa, dilatory effect. Also, so with all of these extra actions It's all about some way of causing me 0 dilation along with the beta blockade. And this is just a picture to help you visualize it. beta blockers are recommended for hypertensive patients with can comment at heart disease and related co morbidities because of the improved and what I should say favorable outcomes in clinical trials with beta blockers. For all of these different Medical problems, hypertension that's obvious. In general, chronic hypertension they're effective, hypertension of emergencies, live along national, all intro operative character, cardia, they're useful the scheme, heart disease. So and joiner, they are 1st line for effort angina, congestive heart failure, you may be scratching your head saying how could they possibly work? How could anything, the blocks heart function possibly work, and congestive heart failure? Well, clinical trials show favorable outcomes. And what are these drugs doing there, decreasing the sympathetic effects on the sympathetic activation. So people with heart failure and their body is going to do whatever they can to get that heart pumping and get that blood pressure up. But that in turn, that sympathetic action on the heart can cause worsening effect of heart failure. So these drugs, this is the belief in the mechanism anyway. These drugs are blocking that effect. But in congestive heart failure, we're talking about stable patients and low dose cardiac arrhythmias, super inter killer types. These are class to mon williams, anti rhythm x. It's either the calcium channel blockers are class for fun. Williams, anti red mix. hyper thyroidism. What's going on with hyper thyroidism? Well, thyroid going to increase the density of so increase expression of the beta receptors in the heart. And that is going to cause that character cardia. So what beta blockers do, they're blocking that those beta blockers. They're blocking those beta receptors. Therefore they're preventing the tacker, cardia. glaucoma, these are use topically and they decrease the synthesis of aqueous humor. la battle all is a recommended treatment and pregnant women. So let's think about what are the mechanisms that are going on when we use beta blockers for these different Medical problems. So hyper tension is initiated and sustained at least in part by so sympathetic neural activation and we're blocking that block the catecholamines. And that's going through reduce the blood pressure, reduced cardiac output, lower the blood pressure in patients with hypertension. Of course, we're talking about chronic use suppression, renan release, probably as part of it. There may be effects in the cns that have something to do with it. interestingly, marking meter receptors in the heart is going to have very little effect on people with normal heart At rest. Of course, as we speed up our system, exercising our calling on our sympathetic nervous system, the action on the heart tissues will be blocked. negative corona tropic, affect negative via tropic, affect reduction, and arterial blood pressure. systolic pressure, especially during exercise. So if we're thinking angina, sympathetic effect tucker, cardia, we're blocking that. So the drugs reduce tomorrow, cardio oxygen consumption at rest. And during exercise For heart disease ischemic heart disease, the treatment of effort angina, why? Because they reduce my cardio oxygen consumption And they have been shown to reduce the severity and frequency of a tax of angina. So those are favorable outcomes and improve the survival of patients who have had an am I another favorable outcome? So cautions, of course, the undesirable effects are an increase and diastolic volume because we're slowing down the hard. It has a chance to fill up and a D n an increase in the injection time and that can tend to increase the mire, cardinal oxygen requirement. And if necessary in patients with angina, nitrates can be used to character balance that We'll talk more about that in the lecture on drugs use for the management of angina actress, congestive heart failure. As I mentioned before, they decrease the sympathetic activation of the effects of sympathetic activation. So they'll decrease the unstable khaki arrhythmias They will attenuate the sustain sympathetic activation, and they will reduce remodeling. So they decrease electrons, curricular chamber size increase left ventricular rejection fraction. And they may decrease oxidative stress on the mile cart, e M. And congestive heart failure. Most patients with chronic heart failure, stable or failure will respond favorably. They must be used low dose and in stable patients because they can precipitate the acute, the compensation cardiac function. So that's why they must be carefully used. But in the appropriate patients, they do improve outcomes. Been studies now. And this is why I started certain drugs. The studies have been shown that if the, the sapir all car, all the temporal, all these are the 2 are stored and the middle shoulder reduction mortality in the patients will stable severe heart failure. So wherever we can, we're going to use the drugs that demonstrated these effects and clinical trials. Can the effects be extended to other drugs within the group within the class? possibly, but that hasn't been demonstrated in clinical trials. So we don't know for sure As anti rhythmic, they reduce heart rate, they decrease intra cellular calcium overload. They inhibit the after the polarization autumn intensity, they increase the normal conduction time. So that's an increase in the p R interval. They prolong the ab, notice refractory. notice some drugs may have some sodium channel blocking effects. It's doubtful really that these, that that action is related to its anti rhythmic actions. It takes a long time, a week, at least for those membrane stabilizing effects to occur. And in some drugs, it takes a high dose before they actually acts on the sodium cal blocking effects useful and terminating re and print arrhythmias involving the node and controlling them into color response in atrial fibrillation or flutter, beta blockers can prevent recurrent infarction and sudden death and patients recovering from acute my o cardinal infarction, which is why together with an ace inhibitor or arb, not both arb plus beta blocker following a mile cardio infarction that is considered the standard of care. So beta blockers are just blocking the beta receptors and, and I mentioned before an increased transcription and the deposition of these beta receptors on the plasma membrane. So made a blockers are just going to block that. coma they block the formation of aqueous tumor in the sillier re body. They don't affect the pupil size. As certain other drugs do. They don't cause blind, they blurred vision. They don't cause night blindness. They can cause a nasal lacker mold, i mean through nasal lack room old drainage of the beta blocker. The beta blockers can access the systemic circulation. So for certain individuals who may be at risk such as patients with asthma, These non selective beta blockers can instigate an asthma attack, bronco constriction, or patients with cardiovascular proven area effects. So Even though it's a small amount, it's achieving systemic levels. certain patients at risk for problems should not get a beta blocker or foul mac drug Stay tried. beta blockers can be taken half an hour to an hour before the event. That's going to cause that performance anxiety, the situational anxiety. So it will walk the manifestations of that sympathetic nervous system up regulation that's happening with stage. Right? So the palpitations, the tightness in the chest, the shortness of breath, the muscular tension trembling that can occur the flushing, the sweating, the dry mouth. All of these things Low dose propranolol, an hour before the performance, but that's been for a long long time. pearl propranolol has been recommended, but any of the beta blockers would work. blocking cardiac bader receptors risk of brady or re arrhythmias and patient with a be conduction defects who already have rate of cardio, also, peripheral vascular insufficiency by blocking beta to mediated peripheral visa dilation. That's obviously the non selective which brings me to the point I want to make this non selective days. The concept of selective beta blockers, which do not block beta to receptors. This is dose related as the dose of been selected, beta blocker increases that selectivity tends to go away and they can begin to act on beta to receptors. And we see that more non selective effects. So that's dose dependent. The beta one selects of are recommended in patients who need to have a beta blocker. In patients with pulmonary disease, asthma, c O, P d, they are less likely to cause the bronco spasm, but again, certain patients are a lot more susceptible. So possibly, any beta blocker should be avoided the laid recovery from insulin induced hypoglycemia. So this is a kind of 2 pronged. So it's the mated to mediated a pattern glycogen office. And gluco, neo genesis gets blocked. And we're thinking about patients with the type one or anyone who's on insulin dependent. And at some point, even type to diabetics can become insulin dependent. So they, in hypoglycemia. The liver is going to make sugar and the will, it will increase the blood sugar that way. Well, we're blocking that needed to so that's going to block out affect more importantly, as blocking the perception of hypoglycemia, the tremor the tac, cardia, the nervousness. So the individual may not recognize that he or she is dipping into the hypoglycemic stage, and that can be very dangerous. So beta blockers are not recommended in patients who are at risk for hypoglycemia. decreased insulin sensitivity increase per plasma b L deal and 8 still don't really know what the mechanism is there decrease in the release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue And this is a source of energy and exercising muscles. So that gets decreased. cns effects, fatigue, insomnia, nightmares, decrease libido mechanism, not understood. Now beta blocker withdrawal syndrome. So these are blockers. They block the mater, receptors, and blocking beta Can cause an increase in receptor density. So more receptors on the plasma membrane. And so we have, are made a blocker blocking adequate number of receptors is going to do is prevention job, prevent and decrease blood pressure, etc. Whatever it is. Now if that be the blocker is abruptly pulled off, been taking the me to block or long time long time, long term, long term, long time, pull it off. That now we have all those extra receptors. These are receptors And they had maybe a few and unlocks, now we have them all expressed on the plasma membrane. And here we have nor epinephrine and epinephrine coming along. Now activating all of them. And that can cause an increase in blood pressure that is greater even then before the person started taking the drug. And that can even lead to a hyper tentative crisis Or emergency. So they, what are we going to do instead? gradually tape or over time depends on how long the patient been on it, the age of the patient, et cetera. It should be tapered over a week to more than a week. And in the next video, we will give you a brief summary.

[RECAP VIDEO — presenter's own summary of the material above, not new content]

Welcome students to our brief summary on calcium channel blockers and beta blockers. pharmacology, dr. goldstein speaking and here are our sites of action you can see on this figure, all of the sites of action are indicated. And I put circles around our beta blockers. beta receptors in the heart. So we have our propranolol and other beta blockers and, and they just sickle mariel or self of the kidney. And here we have her l. tar calcium channel blockers. circled calcium channel blockers. lower blood pressure by relaxing the arterial, or smooth muscle, and decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. The non d H p calcium channel blockers are verapamil until high as m, and they decrease cardiac rate and force and reduce oxygen demand. So these are the drugs that act on cardiac tissues. diondra, period deans act, mainly on the arteries, arterials, arterials, particularly calcium channel blockers are recommended. First line agents in the treatment of primary hypertension beta blockers, lower blood pressure by decreasing cardiac output and cardiac contract delivery. And they reduce oxygen demand guy red x, ace inhibitors, arms calcium channel blockers. beta blockers and alpha blockers are essentially equivalent in blood pressure lowering effect. So as you can see, all of the anti hypertensive agents will lower the blood pressure. They are all effective they are frequently used in combination because they increase efficacy. They increase the blood pressure, lowering effect, different drug drugs from different classes are put together they, the classes are start, the drug that are put together are from the 1st line. age recommended agents 1st and then the other drugs are added on if necessary. beta blockers are not 1st line agents calcium channel blockers and beta blockers are used in the treatment of an dryness or prevent jerk ventricular arrhythmias and they have other uses as well. And the side effects are going to be related to the mechanisms. So here we have our non d H, p, and R D H b calcium channel blockers separated on this slide with the non d H p on the left in the on the right. So the non d H p, or oral r I V, the various durations of action they block the l type calcium channels in the vessels. And in the cardiac tissues, they reduce vascular resistance, heart rate, cardiac force. And all of this results in a decrease in the oxygen demand. They can be used for antenna prophylaxis, for hypertension, for rate control and atrial fibrillation, for supervision curricular, check a cardio treatment and profile axis. I'm going to go now to the right hand side. The D H p calcium channel blockers are oral varying durations in action. summer I V they block the vascular l type calcium channels to a greater extent than the cardiac channels. They reduce vascular resistance, they have less cardiac depression effect than the non d H. B 's because they have less affinity for those calcium channels. They are used for the prophylaxis of angina and for the treatment of hypertension. And we mentioned before the one drug that is used for sub arachnoid hemorrhage because it got great penetration of the cns. immediate release and the therapist is contra indicated for patients who are risk for andrena at risk for my cardio infarction because of the high peaks and the hyper tension that leads to tucker cardio. So let's look at tack toxicities. Now. These 2 groups, the toxicity of the nanda, hydra period, parodying or a me block, acute heart failure, constipation, d, ma, constipation, especially with for app m L not to say the others don't, but verapamil is known for it. And a B block because we're slowing conduction through the a trio been curricular, no And additive interactions with other cardiac depresses and hypertensive drugs. And R C, Y, p, 's. And all those things excess of hypertension can occur with the any of these calcium channel blockers. But especially with the dairy piece because of that arterial arterial, or visa dilation which can lead to a drop in the blood pressure. And that in turn will cause the reflex tac, ricardo, and interactions as we would expect. additive with other reason di, later. And any kind of pharma co kinetic interactions beta blockers oral perimeter or varying durations of action or extended release forms available as with the calcium channel blockers. There are competitive inhibitors at the beta receptors, antagonists of norepinephrine and that, but nephron some are non select a beta one, beta 2 antagonists. Some are selective for beta one receptors. remembering that selectivity is dose dependent. This is supposed to be a D, goes dependent The higher the dose, the less electricity, some beta blocker to have additional properties that lead to another, that lead to a base dilating effect. And some which I did not go to go into in any kind of detail or partial agonist, so they can cause increase partial increase. And sympathetic action, sympathetic like action mimicking those are not very much used this membrane stabilizing effect. So that's the sodium channel blocking effect, that's the definition a membrane stabilizing, usually at high dose. It's probably not that much involved in the anti rhythmic effect of these drugs. Some are alpha one blocker, some cars, nitrous oxide cetera, phase of dilating effects. They decrease heart rate, decrease cardiac output, and decrease myocardial oxygen demand prophylaxis of angina, post m, R compensated heart failure, adjunct and hyper tension. Because we said they're not 1st line. So you may be wondering, why are they not 1st line? Well we said they're, all of these drugs are applications, they all do the same blood pressure lowering function. And the reason is because of side effects. And that's the only reason they used to be 1st line. But they were removed from that 1st line status with the j n. C. recommendations. toxicities asthma, ab blocker, cute heart failure and patients who are susceptible sedation beta one selective blockers have less but still significant risk of bronco spasm. Some patients tolerate the beta selected one very well, others do not. And then the additive cardiac depression effects that we would see with the non hydro parodying calcium channel blockers and other cardiac depressants. And that includes part 2 of our pharmacology of the anti depressants.
