Welcome students to part 3 of our series on the pharmacology of the anti hypertensive agents, the alpha blockers, the centrally acting some path, the lyrics, reason die leaders. And this will complete our sessions on the anti hypertensive agents. This is Dr. goldstein speaking I am available if you'd like to chat about pharmacology. Just shoot me an e mail. learning objectives are the same as for the other classes of drugs. The idea here is to put the ideas together, connect the dots, connect the bubbles, however you think about it, so that you will be able to recognize how to make decisions about dosing and which drugs to select for your individual patients. I don't ask you to memorize dosing now, just to have a general sense of what you have to think about. You can learn dosing later on when you're in your clinical rotations. Yes, dosing is important. Here are the preparation materials. The scholar are expressed and the practice questions are the only required materials for preparation. I have indicated a number of other resources if you'd like to use them to help yourself out. Here are links, as you can see, I've also included exam review books for review books which help to make the information concise. It's not complete information if you'd like to dig deeper. I certainly encourage that if it fits into your study schedule, If you'd like to see the list on what you need to know, that is on the lecture having to do with the ace inhibitors and arms. The raf inhibitors, beginning with the alpha blockers alpha adrenergic receptor blockers, and this is divided into 2 subclasses. The selective alpha one receptor blockers indicated below, proud to center houses and oxygen. Yes, I have put stars on all 3 of them because there are important pharma co kinetic differences with him. And the non selective alpha blockers he asked, i have put stars on both of those 2 because there are important differences between them. And all of these drugs have important clinical uses. Looking 1st at the various pharma co kinetic properties, the top 3 process in transit and docs as a center or the alpha one selective. And the bottom 2 are the non selective agents. Let's look at the top ones. First. The take away here is their own metabolized in the liver docs allison is a substrate for c, why piece? So of course we are thinking already, potential drug interactions for that metabolic transport, drug interactions, as we call them or pharmaca, kinetic drug interactions. The oral d bioavailability is adequate. All of these drugs are oral plasma. Half life do differ, as you can see, process and has a short half life and requires 2 or 3 times daily dozing. garrison and ox, allison have longer health life and only require once daily dosing, so that once daily dosing is certainly more helpful with patient adherents sticking to the medication. And here, stick to for knox, events from ptolemy. And as you can see are non selective to knock the bon bons, amine has greater affinity for alpha one than alpha 2. But bottom line, it still does bind to alpha 2 and we'll see how that becomes important with the adverse effect attack a cardia. The URL bioavailability is fine. Okay, not great, but it's adequate to do the job. The drug is available only orally, and we can see it's got a really long duration of action. And ptolemy has approximately equal affinity for both alpha subtypes and got a short half life. It is our v only and a short duration of action. And that becomes beneficial because if we want to do its job and then go away This slide shows just a reminder about the alpha one receptor. It is a D q type of protein coupled receptor, which means it will and its physiologic action is activation of that receptor will cause release. manasseh told to phosphate which increases into cellular calcium levels and release day. So glycerol, which activates protein kinase c, which goes on to do various interest cellular functions. So thinking about the increasing into cellular calcium, we think about smooth muscle contraction or any kind of muscle contraction. And so we get alpha one receptors causing visa constrictions. So alpha one receptor blockers will block visa constriction it's blocking access of the counter call me the ligand to the receptor. Therefore preventing visa constriction, which results in b O dilation. Just a little review here. The beta to Add an urgent receptors are distributed within the vast collector of the skeletal muscle and the cars base on dilation. So that effect does not blocked Alpha one and blocking of the alpha one receptors decrease his peripheral vascular resistance and decreases a resistance on the veins, the capacitance vessels. As a result, the blood pressure is reduced. The venus returned to the hardest reduced. And because of the reduction in venus return, the preload is reduced, the decreased arterial pressure, the decreased peripheral vascular resistance will lead to sodium and water retention by the kidney. So that is a compensatory effect blocking the contraction of the capacitance vessels will enhance being as pooling. Therefore, that will decrease the ability to main, a blood pressure in the upright position. So when a person gets normally when a person goes from an recumbent position to an standing position, the veins will contract and that will allow the blood to be pushed back into the heart and subsequently into the brain. So when these are blocked or so, static hyper tension can occur, which can lead to syncope thinking, which can lead to falling. This effect occurs most predominantly with the 1st dose, and it tends to subside over time. As the patient, blood pressure becomes lower, more normalization, if we can use that term of the blood pressure. That said it can persist in some patients, so patients need to be informed about this adverse effect. Also, how do we manage this? So the sodium and water retention diuretics and we know diuretics are also useful and bringing down the blood pressure and the patient may already be on a diabetic. So thinking about it in terms of the alpha block, we want to counteract that sodium and water retention. When the patient comes in for a visit, the standing and recumbent blood pressure, which is how we check for static blood pressure or static hypertension, needs to be checked to see if that patient is experiencing and persistent or so static hypertension. If so, that patient is it increased risk of falling and the 1st dose effect? So the 1st o should be small. Remember the dose response relationship? The higher the dose, the greater the magnitude response, smaller the dose, the smaller the magnitude of response. So we start small and this dose can be adjusted later. And of course, as a dose is adjusted upward, we increase that risk of the 1st dose effect as it were without higher dose. So we advised patients to take it at bedtime because the peak effect, the, the peak concentration of the drug after taking it will occur during sleep time. And the point is to reduce, reduce the risk of falling. But that said, we need to remember that many times the drug is prescribe to older men who have benign prosthetic, hyperplasia for it's urinary actions. These people often have to get up several times during the night to go to the bathroom. So a special point should be made for these patients to be careful about this or a static hyper tension. They should be advised to get up slowly into a sitting position and stay there for maybe a minute, maybe longer. And then rise to a standing position slowly so that their body can equilla brain. And that could hopefully prevent that or so static kind of tension and falling selective alpha. One blockers process and her dress and undock, salesperson are used for mild to moderate refractory hypertension. So refractory means the patient has been given therapy for blood pressure and it just hasn't reached goal. So of course we start with the 1st line agents, and if those are not adequate and we're adding, we start with possibly model therapy. We start possibly was was 2 drugs depending on the patient, possibly have to add on another drug. So 1st line agents possibly have to add automate a blocker. And if it's still refractory, possibly on an alpha blocker or an alpha blocker instead of the main blocker. So what patience would really be a good candidate for an alpha one blocker. older men with benign prost data. confir pleasure, because alpha one blockers are useful for managing the urinary symptoms. So let's take that apart. There are alpha one receptors located in the smooth muscle of the bladder neck and the smooth muscle of the prostate. So, blocking these alpha one receptors can open up the the ureter to allow the patient to be able to release your and from the bladder. So that can relieve to some extent the urinary symptoms of the ph doesn't cure. It's just a symptom. magic fix symptomatic approach. The non selective alpha blockers for nox benjamin and from tall amine are not used for the management of chronic hypertension for oxy. ben's amine is most frequently used to manage the symptoms of excessive chow to call amine release due to c O chromos, i told mom p O chrome offside toma, is a tumor of the adrenal medulla. And it causes either occasional or continuous secretion of norepinephrine, mainly and also epinephrine. So this is where that excessive counter call amine release is coming from and by using the alpha blocker and cannot see benzo mean that can prevent the razor constriction. That would result from this excessive can call me release, also sweating, of course. An oxy? venza mean isn't irreversible blocker? It has traditionally been used for urinary outlet obstruction. Not so much anymore for oxy bins. amine has been around for decades and decades and decades. present. Robinson and docs, as I said, came on the market quite a bit later. And tommy has also Been around for a long time. It, however, is a competitive antagonist. And as we saw it has short half life and a short duration of action. It's mainly used floor to reverse extrapolation suppressors. To, to remind you these oppressors activate alpha one receptors and increase blood pressure. Now they can leak out of the intervene where the are, where the catheter has been introduced. And by leaking out, it's really clamping down on that area of the vessel and can cause necrosis of the tissues where it is leaking out. So from tall amine can be introduced right there into those tissues surrounding that area and will block the alpha one receptors in those local, in the local africa lecture and can help to prevent the necrosis that the extra position is causing and also prevent the extra zation opening up the vessel and allowing the drugs to move through The it also has a dental use many local well, light came for g. Is a perfect example of a local anesthetic that sometimes contains epinephrine, and that up in different is in there and a root, very small dose. To cosby so, constriction at that local area which will allow the anesthetic to remain in the local area out of the area much more slowly with the base of constrictor present. So the autonomy is marketed for dental use to reverse that epinephrine nasal constrictor effect It has traditionally been used in the diagnosis of fio, chromosome toma, this is an obsolete use but I mention it so that you will at least be aware of it in case you hear it in conversation or you see it on an exam. adverse effects now tracker cardia, especially by the non selective blockers. So the proposed mechanism here is related to blocking alpha to receptor. So let's think about the physiology for a moment. Alpha 2 receptors are located pre synoptic lee, and when they are activated they will inhibit the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine. And that is a regulatory effect. norepinephrine would be excess. I tossed into the sin apps, it would activate its post synoptic receptors. It would also diffuse to the pre synoptic receptors and activate them. So norepinephrine is regulating its own release. Well, the drugs, the non selective blockers are blocking alpha 2, which means that regulatory effect has been inhibited. So norepinephrine release continues, and that would stimulate the cardiac beta receptors. So on top of the reflex tacker cardia, caused by the hypertensive effect of these drugs, we're getting the additional activation of the cardiac beta receptors because of the lack of regulation of norepinephrine release. So that's the theory thinking about my office now. Alpha one receptors are located on pupil or re muscles and cause and the dry assess So we are locking that effect that mid re attic effect. And that will allow, unopposed, must koranic effect, which is contraction of the iris sinkter. And therefore, my o says nasal stuffing us. Now you may recall that drugs that are used to as decongestants to open up the nasal passages are alpha agnes such as fennel f friends such as oxy matalin. These drugs work bar causing contraction on the vessels in the mucosa and then these will new culture. And that will therefore open up the areas within the nasal terminates. So our alpha blockers are doing the opposite thing. They're blocking me off receptors causing visa dilation, which reduces the space in the nose, which leads to nasal congestion. Now intra operative floppy iris syndrome is something is an, an effect that was observed during cataract surgery. So the optimal just noted that the iris was kind of floppy, which made the surgery more difficult. This is since the advent of these alpha one blockers including the alpha one blockers that are strictly for managing the urinary symptoms of b p. H. But that's not the topic of this lecture. In any case, they have come up with strategies for managing this adverse effect. It was also found that asking the patient to stop the alfa block or prior to surgery did not improve the situation. So that recommendation is not made. How does it happen? It hasn't been established and drug interactions well, anything pharmaca kinetic but in terms of, from a code dynamic interactions, other drugs that affect blood pressure, obviously. So drugs that increase blood pressure are going to blunt the anti hypertensive effect drugs. A decrease blood pressure is a beneficial combination most times, which is why we're using the alpha one blockers together with other anti hypertensive to increase the blood pressure lowering, efficacy And moving now to our centrally acting some path linux, the offer to adrenergic receptor agonist quantity is by far the most frequently used drug metal dope also has an important therapeutic use. Looking 1st at the pharma co kinetic properties, bioavailability is adequate bottom line, the drugs and after all gets into the systemic circulation to do the job. Low plasma protein binding. So the drugs are mainly traveling around in the bloodstream of 3 drug able to move into the tissues where they need to go. We see quantity in patrick metabolism, andro paddic circulation, probably contributes to decent bioavailability muscle door par is in fact a cat call amine. So it is a substrate of cat, a call o methyl transferees, which is expressed in the gut and deliver renal excretion of plenty of unchanged drug. You can see that the bio availability would allow for on change drugs to be introduced into the nephrons into the urine. So what do we think about with unchanged drug being? excrete it in the urine. We think about patients with renal impairment and potential for needing and dose adjustment. The good thing is that the drug monograph, most drug monograph list, renal dosing, guidance, so that you don't have to guess all you have to do is look it up. We see quantity and has a pretty decent half life. It still requires twice, twice, daily dosing, duration of action is about 6 to 10 hours. Now hold off on the other hand, has a short plus and a half life, and a pretty long duration of action. Then you'll understand that when we get to the mechanism, nonetheless, it's still given $2.00 to $3.00 times daily. For tolerability. Now let's look at quantity in dosage forms for a moment, the oral tablet, so that would be the one that's rapid release and needs twice. daily dosing, the extended release capsule. So that's more convenient for the patient that can be once a daily dawson. It transdermal patch is interesting and it's one time weekly. So once every 7 days, the parent needs to be changed. Many patients like the patch, it tends to be a little more tolerable, but it is quite expensive. And we have epidermal injection. So solution for epidermal injection and that's for pain management. So you can see quantity and has a number of indicate a number of dosage forms for its various indications methyl dopa as a tablet. And I V let's take a look at our alpha to receptor a little reminder. Here they are, the inhibitory type of d protein coupled receptors. They inhibit a dental l cy clues which decreases cyclic and p and decreases protein kinase a activity. And they are coupled to other signaling pathways. The offer to receptors are located present, optically personnel optically and in non junction or sites. So are a centrally acting alpha to agonist act in the central nervous system. So they do pass through the blood brain barrier. They are possibly diffuse through and they will act centrally, but they will also act wherever alpha 2 receptors are located. So in all of these tissues, So let's talk about how these drugs work so that we call them some path lyrics and a drug that blocks the activity of the sympathetic nervous system is called a some powerful lyric. And these act from the central nervous system. So right from the top in the brain stem, where there is the center of the sympathetic nervous system. And by blocking the alpha to receptor as the inhibitory receptors, sorry, not blocking by activating these inhibitory receptors that is going to reduce the sympathetic outflow right there from the brain stem. So how does this work? Well, there are probable mechanisms that's the best we can say. They activate post synoptic alpha to receptors in the brain stem. Therefore, causing the to reaction downstream. They activate pre synoptic alpha to receptors. So we know that that's going to be a regulator of nor epinephrine release. So it's inhibiting norepinephrine release. And for many years there's been the proposal, the quantity and also binds to something called immune dazzling receptors. And that contributes to the blood pressure lowering effect. It hasn't really been demonstrated definitely, but it keeps coming up over and over. So I mentioning it here so that you are alert to that potential mechanism. Certainly post fanatic and present after activation of alpha to receptors make sense that it would reduce the sympathetic outflow. We lower the blood pressure, the lower the heart rate, we lower the mile cardio contractor lety, all of these sympathetic effects. Now, if we are blocking the sympathetic receptor, the energy receptors in the cardiac tissue, we're going to get our parasympathetic effect. And what is the action of the parasympathetic must koranic m to receptors on cardiac tissues. It's to lower the heart rate and lower the conduction through the atrial metric killer node. So brita, cardia occurs as a fairly common side effect of the altitude, agonist Alpha, to agnes, lower blood pressure by decreasing heart rate, relaxing capacitance vessels. reducing peripheral vascular resistance, sensitivity to the bearer receptor regulation is maintained. importantly, renal blood flow and g, f, R, mariel, or filtration rate, are essentially unchanged. So that is a nice benefit of these drugs. And what else do I want to tell you? So I'm going to now talk about methyl dopa. And on the next slide, i have a picture of how this works. So I'm going to move to the next slide. So we see here, methyl dopa Is actually converted to methyl dope i mean And with our physiologic enzymes open. mean beta hydrox allays is converted to alpha methyl nor epinephrine. Now this is in the vesicles in side pre snap dick russell calls circles. So you may remember that methyl dope i how's a short plasma halflife it, but a long duration of activity. So the reason is because it's taken up out of the plasma quickly. It is taken up into the present optic neurons where it is, it undergoes this conversion. So when the vesa call is signaled to move to the plasma membrane and exercise toes its contents methyl nor up and ever goes down instead of norepinephrine. Because methyl norepinephrine has replaced nor epinephrine, in the vertical. And as a result of this call called a false transmitter, methyl norepinephrine has a different action and norepinephrine. Yes, norepinephrine will activate alpha 2 receptors, but it also activates alpha one and beta one receptors methyl norepinephrine acts on alpha to alpha, to agnes. That is what it does. false transmitter therapeutic use is look look 1st at methyl job on the bottom because there's only one use nowadays. And that is the management of hypertension and pregnancy. It is safe. It does not cause to read a genic effects. It does not reduce blood flow to the placenta, it does not reduce blood flow to the mother's kidneys or to the baby's kidneys. The fetus is kidneys. So it is safe and pregnancy and it can be used for the management of hypertension and pregnancy. This would be a chronic use of this drug. We have other drugs also used for management of hypertension and pregnancy. methyl dopa is still one of the important ones. Now quantity and you can see has a number of different therapeutic uses. refractory hypertension. So what do we mean here? Well, obviously it's not a 1st line agent. It is definitely effective, but it is associated with a number of just really some common side effects that make it less tolerable than other drugs. So it's an add on pain management. So we're marking else to receptors or sorry, we're activating alpha to receptors which will in turn prevent the pain signal transmission from the spinal cord. So epidurals, this is given growing up in durrell and fusion into the spinal region, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. It is an alternative, there are other drugs that are used. First. The stimulants, or selective. I should say, serotonin, norepinephrine re uptake inhibitors. Both of those groups of drugs are 1st, but quantity may be helpful. How does that work? Actually, that hasn't been established. We need to know more about the neurology and neuro science of the brain. glaucoma, these are drops up, falmouth drops. There. They act to reduce the formation to make we assume or substance abuse. withdrawl. I should've used the word withdraw here With drawl. So a person who wants to stop using opioids or alcohol or smoking these patients, can you have this kind of call them in and do symptoms? So the quantity can be helpful in managing those symptoms, which can certainly help get through that withdrawal period. mental pause. So management days on motor symptoms, hot flashes wedding the out by activating the alpha to receptors that can help managing these symptoms. There are different ways to manage them. Usually, women are given estrogen and possibly per justin at the time of mental pause or 50515253 those years. estrogen should not be taken for a long term. But some women can't have estrogen. Are there at risk for breast cancer or for other reasons? So quantity might be useful, it can be pills. And we saw that we have our immediate release tablets and our extended release capsules or the transdermal pouch. So that's the, how these drugs are used. What they're used for. So let's talk about the potential adverse effects. Again, I'm only giving you the common ones, and the potentially serious ones. And the other 2 agnes frequently cos sedation. You'll often see you'll often you may hear a patient who's taking the quantity and complain, well I take the tablet doctor and the next thing I know I'm so sleepy. I can't keep my eyes open and think, remembering that the strongest, taken twice a day. That can be a problem for this patient during the day. So the sedation, the drowsiness, mental depression, like the patient may complain. I'm really having trouble thinking. I can't seem to think clearly like I usually do. And the drugs definitely cause constipation. So those are the main ones. I should put braid a cartier here too. These are the central ones, but I don't want to forget brita cardio. I am here while I'm here for you, cardio is a common here I have it right here. Right here. So patients with cardiovascular disease who already have some kind of rate or cardia, or coronary insufficiency, or recent myocardial infarction or conduction disturbances should not be getting this drug. Now let's talk about discontinuation. This is a very important point to remember with the alpha, to agnes. If a patient has been taking the drug chronically over time, the drug must be gradually tapered, because the sudden discontinuation can causes catecholamines search. And I remember we've been blocking the sympathetic outflow all this time. Now we abruptly withdraw the drug and the, the brain stem is going to send down that sympathetic signal that catecholamines surge. That's going to cause rebound hyper tension, and that hyper tension can be serious headache, apprehensions, tremors, abdominal pain, swearing, tact recording. You can see all of these sympathetic nervous system effects that are occurring with that sudden discontinuation tape or tape or tape are very important. We said that quantity is an add on drug, and it's often added on together with a beta blocker. So what would happen if we withdraw quantity 1st? Well, now we have this unopposed raisal constriction. And the me, the blocker is blocking our beta to receptors, especially if it's a non selective beta blockers. It's blocking our beta to reason dilatory response. So we get all of this unopposed, medium construction, and that can lead to rebound hypertension. So the beta parker must be tapered and withdrawn prior to the quantity several days, even a week even longer than a week. Sometimes you don't want to take that long, but several days and then the quantity can be tapered and withdrawn. And what's the reason for all of this? To reduce the risk of a rebound hypertension, and this should manage it Well by tapering, tapering, tapering, The direct pays to die later are the oral hydrolysis and monoxide all knoxville and the parental hydrology. And again niger press side and from the old a pound. And I do want you to be aware that calcium channel blockers Are also visa di leaders are in this, these are di, later category, but they're 1st line have so many uses that I liked to separate them out and talk about them on their own. pharmacokinetics properties. Well I the I, the ivy oral oral bioavailability. You can see here goodbye availability with monoxide model. So, so with hydro l as in and even, that's the variable. There is a range Lots of protein mining with hydrology in an accident, been around a long time. And actually the degree of protein binding was lifted. And any of the pharmaca kinetic information that I could locate? hydrazine extensive 1st passive fact, which I'm sure you would have figured out from this low bio availability and it is through a seed lation wire and a 2 and a seat all transferees type 2. And we'll talk about that with adverse effects because of the genetic variability between patients. Here we see again, face to face to face, to face students. All of these undergo phase 2. If that's how you want to remember it. With transfer raises being involved in the metabolism and we know that transfer raises the phase 2 metabolic reactions, result and hydrophilic. Water soluble metabolites, Hi, hydrology, and urine and metabolize, and all the pam urine. And the tabloids will look at night to Pro site on the next slide because that's really got complex metabolic pathway. halflife To 8 hours. So duration, i mean up and onset is quick, duration is fairly long. I V of course quicker. monoxide all duration is very long, 3 days And, and all the pam. Quick, quick, quick, quick, short, half life. Quick onset, short duration. Looking at nitro process. Now, nitro process has a fire, has cyanide in its structure, which I'll show you in a later slide. After pro site is taken up by red blood cells, it is converted to nitric oxide, and it is the, nitric oxide that causes the base dilation. Now it's metabolism is a Saturday little process We have in our bodies, inner mitochondrial, an enzyme called rotor knees, which and the job of this is to detoxify cyanide. And it does this by using the sol sulfur donor for cyro scientific, which is inactive and non toxic. But I'm sure you can imagine that the system is saturate all. So if the patient is getting a large amount of nitro press side and that would be continuous fuse infusion over days, this system can become saturated leading to cyanide toxicity. As the sulfur donor becomes exhausted, Looking at the half life. Now nitro process, i'd short half life hypertensive effect, really quick duration, really short. So nitro process is manageable because when it is removed, it goes away quickly. And so it's very useful for hypertensive emergencies, hypertensive crises, it can, it will have a rapid action. It can be controlled, so as not to bring down the blood pressure too fast and too far. And it can be removed when the patient is stabilized and it will go away quickly. So I assign 8 is our metabolite that is readily excrete it. And this fire sign it can accumulate and patient with renal failure. And many of these patients who are terribly ill with the may not have the rental function that they normally would have. So let's talk a little bit about b N A seatle transferees to n A T to. So this has been studied and terms of pharmacogenetics. And quite a bit is known about the various forms of this enzyme, this transfer rays. We know that there are certain people who have a mutation, some type of a single nucleotide polymorphisms. So some little change in which they will have a deficit of these enzymes. It will either be a type of enzyme that is not as active or they could even just be missing. So there are fewer the N A seal, transferees type 2. So they are called phenotypically slow. A seal later is just not going to metabolize substrates of any t 2 as rapidly as people who have a so called normal complement or an extra normal complement on these in forms. So these slow seattle leaders are going to have increased plasma levels Of drug as compared to patients who have more of these active enzymes. So this is for a given dose of course, flows. Seattle later are at risk for developing anti nuclear, anti bodies and a lupus like syndrome. And this occurs because of high levels Of the drug of hydrolysis. So if it's high levels, because the dose is large or high levels, because the patient is not metabolizing the drug either way, these patients are at risk for this adverse effect. Now on the other side, let's look at rapid to see leaders. So just as a general concept, people who are in the rapid category phenotypically, we'll have some type of a mutation in which they create a greater number of the enzymes. So there are more enzymes on board to metabolize substrate and as a result or phenotypically rapid, a seal later is the drug becomes inactivated at a much more rapid rate. And therefore rapidly see leaders are going to have decrease plasma levels for a given dose as compared to people with a normal. They may use that word, compliment of a sealed and a seattle transfer ace type to. So they may have an inadequate response because they are not getting up to that they are reputed level of the dose. So what are these? So let's talk about these drugs. Now I've given you the structures here. You know, you never have to memorize structures for me, but they're here to help you kind of visualize the drug. So hard rousing, relaxes, vascular smooth muscle in the arterials that causes dilation of the arterials. It does not have an effect on the veins. We don't know how it works. monoxide all. We believe the scientists who study this believe that monoxide or causes an opening of the certain potassium channels called the K A T p channels. And the smooth muscle of the arterial, or member of the arterials arterial rascals are and that will in turn cause hyper polarization, which will cause relaxation of the smooth muscle. Again, monoxide all acts only on the arterials, but not on the venue. Also the nitro process, I was looking at structure 1st sodium, lighter process, that's how it comes here are cyanide molecule, adams in here. So you can see this is quite an interesting structure with triple bonded nitrogen to oxygen, the cyanide, and the iron, the drug activate, gone a little cycle, is either because it causes the release of nitric oxide. And certainly it's a nitric oxide. It leads to the nato dilation or direct stimulation of the go on a little cyclic. It's the nitric oxide. That is the main belief with this drug that will increase either way, cyclic into cellular cyclic g m. P levels are increased not will lead to vascular smooth muscle relaxer ation. And now a night repress side dilates arteries, arterial venue, all veins. So the whole vascular cher, where the whole vascular turn that's it for an older pam is a D one agonist a doping mean, d, one receptor agonist, and it works peripherally not centrally. So in the periphery, the D one receptors are located in the mesenteric vascular to the renal vascular cher. So by relaxing a sorry, by activating d one receptors in the military and the renal vascular cher that will cause relaxation of this smooth muscle plus natural recess. And diaries, it dilates, peripheral arterials. So of these 4 drugs we saw, the 3 of them act only on the arterials. natural process works on the entire vascular cher. Let's take a look at the hydro l, as in monoxide, all these direct nasal die later. For refractory hypertension, these certainly are not 1st line. They're basically last line. They relax the smooth muscle of the arterial, just decreases, are systemic vascular resistance and mean arterial pressure. So we know we're going to get those compensatory responses that are mediated by the bearer receptors. The sympathetic nervous system and we get our renan andrarios tents and l doctor on system involved. So all of these, because that blood pressure that systemic vascular resistance, the peripheral resistance is dropped. We get the entire gambit. The compensatory responses based di later, is work best in combination with other drugs that will oppose these compensatory responses. Now interestingly, was dilated with hydro l as in monoxide l. They do not cause or fill static hypertension or sexual dysfunction. They don't act on the veins. And the sympathetic reflexes are intact And this is just a little figure to show you the mechanism of a compensatory responses. We see our increase sympathetic nervous system here and our renal system here. So what are we doing to counter act? A sodium and water retention. These drugs need to be given with diuretics. To counteract the tac, cardia. We give beta blockers, so it's going to be the hydrology and the direct beta blocker. And what other, whatever other anti hypertensive is necessary to reduce this patients blood pressure therapeutic uses hydrazine, well moderate to severe hypertension, so refractory to other drugs. interestingly, it's quite useful in certain patients when given with a nitrate for heart failure was reduced rejection fraction And hypertensive emergency. We do remember it is given i it is available intravenously and pregnant patients. So here's our pregnancy again. And it can also be given safely. postpartum monoxide, all oral, only severe, refractory hyper tension, very strong anti hypertensive drug natural press side for acute hypertensive states and for for something called controlled hyper tension during surgery. So during surgery, to keep that blood pressure in line And all the pam, severe hypertension, it's only received f d, A approval for treatment of up to 48 hours consistent with its clinical trials. And because it does not reduce our renal blood flow, it is useful particularly in patients renal compromised and it's also good for kids. For short term youth. adverse effects can acknowledge the anorexia, palpitation sweating, flushing. So you can see these are the compensatory responses reflex, taca, cardia. And in patients who are at risk for cardiovascular disease, flor coronary disease scheme, a heart disease that can provoke android because capture cardia increases oxygen consumption, salt water retention that can lead to the can to congestive problems and heart failure, which is why they have to be given with a dire rhetoric, And we've talked about all of these now hydrology and causes this loop is like syndrome be in slower see later. And also in patients getting a high dose. It's a high dose at the high. It's a bodies exposure to this high levels of drug that can lead to this lupus like syndrome rash arthur l. J. So the joint pains and the rest that occurs, the good thing is when the drug is removed, these are all res, reversible monoxide all unique side effect is something called hyper try, closes this hair growth that that occurs really anywhere or hair naturally grows monoxide all you may have heard of topic, lee is placed on the scalp to grow hair and people who are experiencing male pattern baldness. So it's always good to know the class of facts. And when we started wrong, we should know those. What I'm referring to is unique adverse effects, adverse effects that occur with that drug within that class, but they don't occur with the other drugs within the class. So hard drill is in the loop, is like syndrome monoxide, all hyper try, closes nitro process, the cyanide accumulation. And of course, anything that causes a drop of blood pressure, like nitro or pro sign does, the excess of blood pressure lowering panola. Pam also causes an increase in interact killer pressure. And this can cause optic nerve damage and patient to have glaucoma. So that needs to be kept in mind. Now I didn't mentioned before, there are antidote to the cyanide accumulation sodium nitride, so it with sodium, sorry, sulphate these are sulfur donors. So that will replace the sulfur and allow cyanide metabolism to continue and hydroxyl co. ballman is actually an x. Are dennis vitamin b 12 that will take up the cyanide within its structure, and it will form cyan or co ballman, which is also vitamin b 12 and non toxic. Here is our butterfly rash. You can see typical lupus butterfly rash and she's also got it on her forehead, but not, not so easy to see here. And you can see the hair gross on this woman, wherever her normally grows. We see it's just throwing out all over. That's called hyper try coasts I am not going to be talking about this, these groups of drugs, drugs, because cat call me depletion in the sympathetic nerve terminals. They are rarely used. Some of them are not even market it anymore. You may see them on a board exam. I am introducing you to the idea that they are here. They may be in other countries. So if you're going to be practicing in another country, you may see them. I will not be testing you on these. The boards might though And same thing with ganglia locking drugs, milk, melamine, and dry mouth, and these are not even marketed anymore to my knowledge. I am mentioning them. If you want to test your knowledge of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, the autonomic nervous system, this is a good way to do it, figure out one of these ganglion blockers causing but I will not be testing you on these at this time. And I've given you a matching game to see if you can match the mechanisms. I might have some fun trying this out. These are the answers. So I recommend you don't look at the answers 1st. And these are matching adverse effects. The answers are here on the right, so I actually, the answers are not on the right. This is a double list of the various adverse effects. So I challenge you to match them up. And I will give you a brief summary of this group of anti hypertensive agents in the next video.

[RECAP VIDEO — presenter's own summary of the material above, not new content]

Hello students and this very brief summary. We will summarize the anti hypertensive drugs alpha blockers centrally acting politic violators. Dr. goldstein speaking I have circled this group on this figure that shows all of the anti hypertensive agents We have our mizo die leaders. I want to point out that the calcium channel blockers are in the group of diesel di leaders The alpha one under nerdy receptor, competitive antagonists that we call alpha blockers are used in the management of hypertension and the 3 drugs are present rasmussen, and Dr. The latter to harass us in a dark sanderson can be given once daily, and they are the ones that are most frequently prescribed for chronic hypertension, they decrease peripheral vascular resistance by causing relax ation of both the arterial and venus smooth muscle. And that will reduce the peripheral resistance and the preload the drugs cause only minimal changes to cardiac output. renal blood flow and glow, mariel or filtration or so static hypertension and reflex after cardio are common with the initiation of therapy. This is called the 1st those effect, salt and water retention occur with these drugs. And the dia, rhetoric is normally recommended to mitigate this adverse effect. Alpha one blockers are adjunctive drugs. They are not 1st line. They are added on and patients with hypertension that is not being mounted to not coming down to goal using 1st line agents. They are not recommended initial treatment because in the week clinical trial data on these drugs, they do not demonstrate morbidity and mortality benefit Alpha one blockers throw this in dark service and may also be useful in the management of urinary symptoms is benign pro, static or perch. Or fee, they are alpha $1.00 blockers. They do reduce the urinary symptoms by blocking the alpha one mediated smooth muscle constriction in the bladder neck in the years and also in the prosthetic smooth muscle Non selective alpha blockers for oxy lindsey mean and then tall amine Are you are not used for chronic hypertension management so knox he bends, i mean may be useful in the management of sympathetic sentence, resulting from feel chromosome toma, kind of call. amine release surgery is the treatment of the chromosome: toma, the drugs cause earth a static hypertension and tact. cardia Also to agnes inhibits sympathetic laser motor sim centers, and that reduces sympathetic outflow from the cns, which is called the central sympathetic effect reduction in cardiac output by decreasing heart rate reduction and peripheral vascular resistance, relaxation of capacitance vessels. All of these lower the blood pressure the drug does not appreciably decrease renal blood flow. org low mariel or filtration rate. quantity is administered as oral tablets and long acting patch for the management of hypertension, epidermal quantities for pain management, quantitative and also for managing the subset of symptoms of associated that are associated with substance abuse withdrawal. And I also mentioned mental pause symptoms for managing the sympathetic effects. And while really the major motor affects swearing, flushing, etc, and the trend that's rural tablet or the transdermal couch as well. abrupt withdrawl of quantity can cause rebound hypertension. If the patient is taking a beta blocker as well, the beta blocker must be tapered in, withdrawn prior to tapering, and withdrawing the quantity. common adverse effects of sedation, dry mouth braid a cardia and constipation. methyl dopa is an alpha to agonist. However, it is a false transmitter, it is converted within sympathetic neurons to alpha methyl nor epinephrine, which displaces up in f rain in the storage vessels. When it is released into this and apps, it will activate the central alpha 2 receptors. The drug save in pregnancy, and its effects also include sedation rate of cardia and constipation among others. Direct acting diesel di later is hydrology and monoxide will relax. smooth muscle of the arteries and the arterials, but not the names. They decrease peripheral vascular resistance and lower blood pressure. They're used only for the management of refractory hypertension. monoxide all is a powerful anti hypertensive agent. Because reflex chalka cardia, which could, which is going to increase oxygen consumption in the cardiac tissues, mac, and prompt and join a factor as my cardio and fortune and heart failure. They do cause salt and water retention. So beta blocker and a diuretic are recommended to counteract these effects. hydrology together with a nitrate is used in the management of heart failure, hydrology and can also be given to pregnant women for the management of hypertension both during pregnancy and following pregnancy. And the immediate postpartum period adverse effects include had a palpitation sweating. So these are related to the compensatory effects of hyper tension that occurs with the drug hydro. And they can also cause a lucas like syndrome and patients who are receiving a high dose or in poor seattle leaders in which these patients also how high blood levels Is reversible, monoxide bill can cause hyper try, try closest nitro process. nitro press side is given only intravenously and is powerful visa dial either most arteries and veins. It causes the release of nitric oxide nitro pro side reduces peripheral vascular resistance and mean us return. excessive hypotension can result in death. This is such a strong hypertensive drug Is rapid onset and rapid offset. So the effects disappear rapidly when the drug has withdrawn. The most serious toxicity of nitrous oxide, except for hyper tension, is accumulation of cyanide, which is a component of its structure. It can occur with prolonged infusion, or if there is a defect in cyanide metabolism, and this would be a genetic issue. sodium sire sulfate is a sulfur donor that facilitates fire and are in metabolism. And by the way, hydroxyl come, all man, which is me, 12 vitamin b 12, combined with cyanide to form the non toxic cyan cobol, which is B 12 From all the pam is an intravenous dope. I mean, the one receptor agonist agonist that induces dilation of the peripheral arteries and now 3 recess, direst, and now 3 recess. Those d, one receptors peripherally are located in the mess in terror and renal vascular beds and all the pam does not cross the blood brain barrier. And so it does not act centrally from all the pam causes reflex check cardia headache and flushing and increases intra ocular pressure. So it should be used with caution and patient with glaucoma. And that concludes our series on the anti hypertensive agents.
