Hello, this is Dr. Brian bady again. I think you, you probably remember from radiology in anatomy last year and the other half i'm starting to take back on is, is teaching a lot of the histology. So when I'm starting to grab onto histology lecture as much as they can, one of the topics came up was review anatomy and histology and technical little in reality of the pulmonary systems that you're ready for understanding the sort of layout of what you're going to deal with in the system. So let's get started. The basic things we're going to do is do a little bit of the review of the gross anatomy and respiratory system. The stuff you've already done in, in labs and things like that. But was just a review then we're going to discuss a little bit more about the more folks most of our time on the and reality and histology of the rest, very anatomy. And that's going to include things like lungs, trachea. And we're going to discuss how that the development of that and the structure of those tissues lead to some functional clinical circumstances that you're going to need to understand. So we all know from, from back in the day, especially a lot of lectures, i tend to give you the respiratory anatomy includes things like the nose, mouse, the fairings, the larynx, but also includes the trachea and lungs for the next several weeks. A lot of what you're going to focus on are the tricky lungs for fairly obvious reasons. But I just don't want you to forget about the starting point. That is mostly in the head neck, right? We're not going to discuss that much here. But because you can always review your old lectures, but this is where we're going to talk about the re, can long as primarily nothing. Keep in mind. Again, we're not going to discuss this in great detail. This is kind of the only slight on this. But the respiratory anatomy that also is relevant is the ribcage and it how it moves, because we know that inspiration and expiration involved number of mussels. So for example, elevation i was a part of inspiration. Typically at least a couple breathing, use the intercostal external inner castles, is the sum of the inter, castles and a diaphragm. But you also use the certain plan, an asteroid, and scaling the elevator. The top part of the expiration is mostly passive, recoil, or as in some cases the internal enter, castles and other structures. So the other thing that's again review are structures of the lungs, right? So we have the, the upper and lower, middle and lower legs on the right long and the upper and lower loves of long and those fishers, right? And then we look at the media style surfaces, right? So the, the meat, the media side, you see a lot of impressions as well, right? So there's impressions for structures there and there borders. Right? So there's impressions include impressions for the, the order and a lot of other structures. And you also see a lot of the great vessels and bunker, right? So the next thing you need to discuss, i mean again, this is review where you know that the, the order and the structure of the vessels relate to the position they are in the heart. But you need to understand, again, this is relevant when you sing as an A rated graph. All is also an anatomy lab, right? That almost immediately these pony arteries and veins, they start to branch because they have to go not just to the, the lobes but all the segments of as well. So the prominent arteries in the pony veins, right? They have a slightly different numbers because you know, the veins are, they're already split into before they get along. But they, they've branch out. Right. And they run those reason. And veins went along parallel to the bronco, pulmonary segments. So what are the 2nd? Right, so we know the trachea is this one tube, right? And then you have boxes, right? Those are primary boxes are main. bronchitis, right? So there's one left and is one, right? But then those main boxes split into different numbers of things because we have different lobes. So beyond the main focus, there's a low bar bronk, us, some people call a secondary bronchitis. And then from there they split into tertiary rock guy, right? So or a segment of progress. So for example, you see on the, on the right mean bulk is here is in green. The purple has a low bar, bach, i. So there's 3 on this because there are 3 lobes. And then each one of them has multiple segment. So this is what, this is an illustration of. Now, besides those, those, those tertiary ones, then you end up having things like buckles right now, if we look at this, and we still, this example is a chromecast where the, where the blank i were filled to the maximum with, with plastic. What you see is there is a huge network of space, right? So this is the only field of air. This might also remind you of why we saw x rays of people showing up as if there was nothing there because most of the along is actually just full of air. There are light a blood vessel there. For example, on the other side, the right side is image, right? You can see the arteries and veins also fill and you can see how integrated there are within the spaces between those structures. What you'll see soon when we talk about the salary is a reason why this thing on the, on the left side of the picture is, looks, you know, this is just where the air would be, right? That's already a lot of the space. But how integrate an in between every one of those spaces, their blood vessels are basically the long as almost all just small, tiny little capillary beds and being daniels integrated within a big network of mostly spaces for air. Right. So how do we get there? So the loans start out as a little bud right. Coming in during the 4th week, this little part of the forgot, right, right over here starts the fascinate. Right. And what it is is basically little growth of an empty pocket, right? There's a visible right over here, right? This, this little tiny depression becomes this long, but Right? I'm going to briefly to show you that because the easier to understand. So there's a little respiratory, every digital phone venture wall, right? So the, the, the front part of the walls, the forget. And it's basically because remember, the forget, this is lined with editor, right? So this entered arm because a written a look acid that's being expressed by the measure nearby. It kind of invalidates, right? And that ended arm is ultimately becomes the ceiling with the larynx trachea and the lungs. Right. And the cartilage and all those other things that are from editor around it, right? Those are, those are, there's a lot of the same as it and we just discuss it, induces it using written on cast. So there's low blood loan, but right as little beginning i is actually in direct communication on the forehead. Right? So if you look at this in terms of where it's starting, right? So this is Megan, this is a little little embryonic. forget right line with me that, or there's a little pocket, right? This little lung by my lorine, which rachel dave are taking is what it's called. It starts to separate out. And eventually there's a little bit of a wedge of like there's actual hole, right? The starts become the initial initial little long months, right? So there's going to be the left and right, long's Right Question. Before we jump to that, I just want to explain so that eventually, i mean, I don't want to make you worry too much about this. But eventually there's a separation that starts a form, right? When these things start to pinch together again, and this is called the trickier suffered your symptom. That trick yourself, your system is important, right? For a couple of reasons. One of them is, it explains why, when you look at the trachea, you end up having nothing to soft tissue here, right? We know that triggers cartilage and it's in the very front and the sides. But a soft tissue on the inside of because it's something that forms from that septum. But the other thing keep in mind is that explains why you find some abnormalities that happen with people. Sometimes where you might have some connections between the trachea and the office in a say congenital anomaly that happens with a new unit, right? So sometimes babies are born, where they actually have connections between the trachea and I guess you can imagine that something needs to be corrected because because of the risk of things like drowning, right? So that's, that's where I want to go with that, right? So, you know, having a so fiber muscular to what we know about this and is the side of the cartilage on the front, right? So that's highland cartilage right here. Right? And, and as muscular to one back, right? So there's muscle and there's also the opposite glands. Right, but there's a smooth muscle on the back that's up against the office. Okay. Another detail you should be aware of is the, the branching of those partial buds, right? So the buckets, i was starting from the 2 little nubbins that came in that, that the for guy, right? Those long beds they start to branch, right? So this 1st branching right is obviously the 1st branch and would become the primary broker, right? That's the 2 things, right? So if we this, this drawing is kind of in a ring order, right? So starts on the top right from the looking from the side and you see this little, little respiratory to ever taking them. Right. There's our friend you'll outages, right? The beginning of the liver and right off the forgot a little depression. And it starts to bifurcate in 22 directions, right? One to the right ones, the left. As time progresses are $32.00 days, you see it's splitting into more obvious bronco each one of those bach. I then start branching informing secondary rocket, right? So those are the loaves. And then those low starts become split into segment from guy by basically the 7th week you have most of the segment from California Because a lot, again, a lot of the stuff down here with regard to endurance blank means there are things we've already mentioned a 2nd ago ok, so the other thing you need to be aware of right is a bank high and alveoli. Right? So the bank are mostly form carla's right. There was the semi circular colleges that had some overlap with each other recently to the trade that just a little bit more organized in a spiral patent. But as you get to things called blankie ols, right? So b R I B R O N C H I O L, yes I bronchial. You end up having a cartilage ring sort of disappear, right? That's actually the difference between voc you'll and a bronchitis They support these large those cards, those bunk eyes per larger cartilage. And then as it does get to bronsels they, they stop having cartilage. All Right, this is where it says bronchial is right here. bunch jewels and algio, it does mean to have no correlation support. They don't really need it and they're very small. And those are the things that tend to collapse when one gets compressed. Right? So what are these things look like? And so when we get down to this part, right, these are bunkie. olds is no cartilage anymore. There's some smooth muscle around them. Right. And the end in alveoli, i'll be all I look like little bubbly sex. And this is the place where the blood vessels are integrated so intimately within the walls of them. Right? So this thing that looks, looks kind of like a, like a sack of bubbles, right? surrounded by capillaries. When you look at his logically, this is what you see, right? This is sort of a look for a far away look at it. We see these path pockets, which is would be normally for the air. And you see little capillaries criss crossing through things. And then you see these thin membranes, right? And those membranes are maintained by something called numerous lights. And so here's a S E M look at this, right? So you can see these spaces right there just like pockets has been freeze, fractured right. That broken, there's not what it looks like without breaking it. I but you see are these empty pockets that we looked at close? Would you see on numerous sites? Right. So the 2 different types of sites. There's one like this guy right here. Let's just mostly looks like a nucleus and it maintains a membrane that goes fairly far around the edges of this space, right? So these are spin, really flat, right? The memory with these are all derived from editor, right? So this is a little tissue. And these new sites are among the thinnest types of cells you can find. And this is the one that allows that blood air barrier to transfer gases from the, from the, from the air to one to the but, but is another type, right? These tend to be little bit chunkier, right? Is type 2 new sites. They sit close to those, those type ones, right? They have to because what they're doing is producing surfactant. And so every one of these al fuel are the button little ball shape. Things has to have surfactant lining it, right. And the reason this effect and is there is because it break surface tension. So the fluid is lining as right, allows gases to pass more easily in that blood blood air barrier through the type one New site. So if we look at this and transition transmission electron micro graph, when you see on the side or here, it's a nice view of a type to where you can see it's actually quite a big cell that has some large vacuum because it's making that fact that now here's the base lamina, right? This long base lamina. There's a luminous capillary, right? This is we're talking about happiness. Is this gigantic grey thing on the bottom, right? That's an A richer site. red blood cell. No, they're not big structures. But you can see just how thin this is, right? This is a type one cell. OK, so this is how seen that little thin fell. This is half of a micron. This, this scale bar, right? So what you're seeing is exactly how fin the cell is answer fact that is just the spin membrane on the surface. So he should see is there, this is a very, very small area just for allowing that tiny bit of, of transfer of oxygen. Right? And so when you see this is a generic image i found online. What would you see is when you look at one of these in a normal tissue slide, why would you going to see a lot of spaces for air? You're going to see occasional like if you look at this greenway here, and you can see there's a little new site nucleus there. But any, you see a lot of any created red blood cells, right? And those are the thing sitting capillary bets. And that's the other thing, I mean to be aware of those capillaries, right? So, you know, we already know the capillary better, extremely thin, but these are especially so This is the place where a lot of blood is actually stored, rises been reservoir blood and your lungs a lot of them The average diameter of the things is, is around 6 microns, so it's, it's very small, right? This is worth being aware of because what you saw in the last image and you can see it here is that these capillary beds are often just barely big enough for a red blood cell to go through them. Right? So if you look at this, this drawing and you also look at this s T M, you can see the capillary beds only allow one red blood cell to pass through one at a time. This is one of the reasons why things like sickle cell anemia are a problem, right? Because if you're trying to shove these things kind of in order through your pollen capillaries, if there's a reason that they can get stuck because of their miss their misshapen, does that sound like sickle cell? Then that's a problem, right? knows why that these things tend to manifest themselves and in respiratory disorders. Here's a view of those algio i with the capillaries involved again. And if you compress those capillaries, right, you end up seeing almost nothing in the spaces. Right? So this one without the blood in them. Ok. Last couple of things were in development. I want to make sure that you heard about maybe this would, would've been more fitting with the muscles, but I just, it's now that you're thinking about how long function you should also keep in mind the pool spaces. So the plural spaces in the walls that form them include the diaphragm. And I frames an interesting structure because what it does is it forms from this plural parents in the fold, right? Things this, this membrane is fold. They, they start from the edges of the pur, okay, I mean, the seal mcafee. Right? And the septum transfer something this, this thing starting out right here is just the connective tissue. And it expands into the, into the space between the lungs and the parts of the forget, like liver and all that, that are developing. Right? So this is something starts and starts from the body wall and comes inward. Right? And what you end up with, as you probably remember, is this muscular diaphragm. Remember it's, it's a umbrella shape structure that has a tenderness, middle, right? It isn't, it's, but the main point of this, of course, is that it's coming from the peripheral wall and coming in towards the, the organs that are in a center related that of course we just discuss london pull out he's, i'm not going to read this out loud, he can just read this if you want to later. The main point is is that that poorer, right? There's a parameter, anna, and a visceral para, these are structures that allow the lungs to find past each other by when you are like flight path for the body wall when you're breathing. So this is a, this is the way in which the lungs meet the body wall space without having a physical connection can physical connection, right? They're connected mostly just by fluid. So this is the ration of what's happening when those plural form folds are pro, pair cardio folds are, are I guess engineering, right? So here's this little punctual, but right, we talked a little bit about where these bugs are coming from. This is the space, right? The space here, that's the cielo right? So you know, you have a heart, right? This is the developing heart. And these are the spaces, the potentially the lungs could be in. I. So this space, i mean, a real living organism, right? This, this is right up against each other. There's not a big pocket, the tiny space for fluid. And as we progress, right? So if we go from week 5, week 6, what we see is the space starts us expand and the, the structures that surround the, the heart also expands. It start separating the lungs from the heart, right? At some point usually around week 7, they fused in the middle. So this, this connection between the plural spaces and the pair. Carl space is closed. By week 8, this should all be nice and tight and separated. So you have a pair card, him, a pair cordial space and a plural space. There's hebert The next. The next thing that you should be seeing are, let me know this, this ultimately results in the lungs being separated into, into separate plural spaces where that you're aware of, right? That's where in which there's this serious fluid that surrounds the last thing we should get here. We go surrounds along right and separate the separate the visceral clara from the final para of course we know that then you're going to learn quite a lot more about this. How the pressure differential between these 2 tissues rightness. And then the space is the reason why we have things like with our axes and in other problems, right? It's when those things don't work, right? Or you have to have air or other fluids getting in the space that you end up with problems. We know the ventilation relies on that pressure, right? It's not just mechanical. So this is a slide from another lecture that you can have seen. But this we know that the ventilation right. So thing is a result of changing the mechanical structure of that ribcage that's pulling on the predator. But it's also the difference in pressure on the, from the proper to the visceral player that matters. Right? So maintaining this space, right? And maintaining the pressure there are negative pressure in here is vital. Another thing keep in mind, and this is relevant to almost faces and the development of lungs, right, is that there are natural spaces that are part of the, the parietal space, by the, sorry, the part of the plural cavity that don't necessarily have a lung in them right, so there's a place which gets where in which you have central, essentially a pinching of this space where the plant on district are right up against each other with fluid, but there's no lung in between them. And so it does include this constant media media style recess where the lung is where the heart is right behind it and the cost of die for matic recesses, right? And these names are just descriptive, writes a rib and me to sign him. Why this is what is in front of heart and cost omens. rim and I for manic is just the space between the rivers and the diaphragm. Right? So cost for matic resources are relatively big because long doesn't go all the way down unless you're really in the middle of the breathing. So this will ask for spaces for things like plural tabs. I. So this is the last, I think it's my last slide. And what it basically allows you to do is get access to the fluid and fierce fluid, right? You can, if you know, you can get some aspiration of fluid this way, right? Without having damage lungs and not risky necessarily damage of a dominant organs or the order. I mean the heart keep in mind, right? This is room 10 right here. This rib 9. These are things that you can help it. And the other thing you can do, and this is what becoming more and more prevalent, is that people don't do this as often as you might think blindly might, is something you could also use ultrasound phone to make easier. And so this is something that hopefully at some point you will get some experience using imaging techniques to make this a safer experience. I think that's it. So hopefully you'll get some feedback on this lecture. And I'd love to hear if you have any questions, just email me anytime.
