hypersensitivity and use that particular reaction to detect these or survey even these type of pathogens in a given population so it's important tool so to speak let's talk a little bit about immunological memory because it's an important concept Now we spoke about the role of memory T cells and these are really important cells and they seem to also provide us with lasting immunity.
Their importance, how they work, and the role of immunity is still under investigation.
But classically we always looked at immunological memory as in the presence of antibodies.
This is again not a complete picture because as we just discussed and i want you to understand that and because as we discussed we there's also t memory cells that's important for example when people are discussing whether or not somebody has memory let's say or develop memory after they have covet because a lot of times when we measure that memory is we measure whether or not they have antibodies so that's not the whole picture so it's important to realize that anyway um immunological memory is can be resolved from prior exposure to the antigen.
That is referred to as the primary immune response.
So then the secondary immune response develops the memory now.
So as we talked before, when a B cell encounter antigen for the first time, they differentiate the plasma cells with the help of TH2 or TH17, and then but then some of these plasma cells become memory cells.
So it's important to remember that it's for half distinction between the two.
So the primary immune response usually takes longer time typically two weeks before we reach peak antibody formation.
On the other hand the secondary immune response is almost instant because of the presence of memory cells and this is the goal of vaccination right there is to induce the primary response so that when you encounter the antigen again you don't have to wait two weeks to develop the response you're already ready to go in many cases you can block injury of the pathogen even at the get-go at the mucous membrane before they arrive now there's also isotype switching in this particular instance so with the primary response you start out with the igm isotype and then you switch to igg with the secondary immune response it's immediately idg and you're ready to go um one thing to note here just something that's interesting and it's kind of important that b cells do what these cells do as they interact an antigen or an epitome of an antigen over time they undergo what's called affinity maturation what that means is the antigens will start selecting for the uh for the antibodies that combine the best.
And this is usually created by the actual presence of hyper mutations in the genes that code for the antibodies, those VHVL genes.
So over time, the antibodies that we make become better and better and better and binding with the epitope on the antigen with more affinity.
That's what you want.
You don't want a very weak binding, because weak binding does not elicit a good immune response.
But again, this only happens during the secondary and as time goes by, which is why our initial human immune response is typically not a very strong one.
Let's discuss a little bit immunoregulation because this is a very important topic.
We have kind of talked about these concepts here and there, but let's try to summarize them here in one place.
We've talked about the concept of tolerance.
We will have a lecture especially that discusses tolerance and autoimmunity which is a really important topic again one of the things that can induce tolerance in cells is for example especially in t cells and cause what's called energy is the absence of the cg28 b7 cost immature signal so the absence of that signal can trigger energy but there's other things that can do that and there'll be a lecture For example, it is absence of a stimulatory cytokine, etc.
Also, let's not forget a very important role of T-regulatory cells.
T-regulatory cells are actually subtype of T-helper cells that specifically suppress the immune system.
These can be called actually T-suppressors.
We no longer use that term because we realize they do more than just suppression.
They actually can, they really help with regulation.
They are CD4-positive, like they're T-helfer cells, but the only way to really distinguish them from other T -helfer cells is by the presence of the CD25 and expression of a transcription factor, specifically called FOXP3.
That's really the only way to push them out.
There's also CD8-positive or T-cytotoxic spacer cells, which can help prevent graft rejection and can help prevent our own body from attacking itself, formation of autoimmune diseases.
So these combination of many mechanisms and this is just a really brief introduction guys to this can help us with tolerance and tolerating our self-antigens and not have the immune system just go haywire.
Again there'll be a lecture on this.
We also talked about how how the different cells, Th1, Th2, and Th17, can inhibit each other in a new response by basically using their signature cytokine.
So, for example, TNF gamma that's produced by Th1 inhibits the other, Th2, and Th17, and so on.
So that's a very important way, that way you don't have all of these cells dominating.
But do keep in mind that this is dynamic.
At some point, for example a th1 response may dominate but then it can regress and a th2 then dominates or th17 okay um we already discussed that th17 is by definition a pro -inflammatory type of response that seems to be damaging but you know understanding that information for example we've been able to identify il-70 which is the signature cytokine of that cell as being involved in conditions that are psoriasis, and if you block IL-70, it can actually help patients.
And so the more we understand these mechanisms, how they're used, so we can regulate it, we can help a lot of patients that have both autoimmune and inflammatory diseases that are caused by the malfunction, so to speak, of the immune system.
This slide shows different types of adaptive e-responses involved of clearances of different antigens.
It's kind of a summary for you, but it's a pretty good one.
It just shows you, for example, like neutralizing antibodies can be used to neutralize viruses, bacteria, whether it's intercellular or extracelular, protozoans, whether they are intercellular or extracelular, but don't seem to work at all against fungi and worms.
The hemoglobin response in general doesn't seem to work at all with fungi.
At the same time, it shows you that the cell -mediated immune response or the toxic T cells are very effective against viruses because they are intercellular and intercellular bacteria.
It also shows that complement and obstinization are very good at tackling excellular bacteria.
Complement can also be good at taking out specifically enveloped viruses.
So this is a good just summary for you for your own information.
So in summary, we have discussed the adaptive immune response in this two -type, two-part lecture.
Predominantly talked about immunoglobulin structure, function, the different types as for isotypes, and how are they involved in the type 1, type 2, and type 3 hypersensitivities, which are antibody-mediated.
We talked about different important molecules, MSC class 1 and 2, discussed T-cell receptor structure and function, interaction, associated receptors, its role in immunological synapse, We talked about the B-cell receptor, its structure, which is basically IGT, antibody, and its function in important recognizing antigens.
We talked about how T-cells, even besides specifically helper cells and different kinds, are activated and also how B-cells are activated.
We talked about both the humanoidal and the cell-mediated immune response and the different subtypes of T-helper cells 1, 2, and 17.
We discussed at the end immunological memory and the importance of a secondary immune response and role of B cells in that, and talked a little briefly about T memory cells.
And we also talked about immune regulation and how tolerance is important.
And at the end, I just introduce you to a clinical case, which we will follow up in the office hour and discuss it more together.