Welcome to the Adaptive Immunity 1 and 2 lecture and this lecture will expand on the Adaptive Immunity lecture that we had in the fall and flesh out more the roles of different components of adaptive immunity. The objective of this session is to outline first and talk about the

structure of immunoglobulins and their subtypes and explain the role of MHC molecules both 1 and 2, T cell receptor and B cell receptor, and their role in immunity. We'll talk about how different lymphocytes are activated. We will compare and contrast the four different types

of hypersensitivity reactions. We'll also compare and contrast your modal and some mediate immune response and the roles of T helper 1, T helper 2, and T helper 17 cells. And then we'll finalize this lecture by discussing how we regulate the immune response. In this slide let's

talk a little bit briefly about each of the molecules that we see commonly in that immune response. Of course things like immunoglobulins which are also referred to as antibodies antibodies in the globulin same term. Don't forget that the B -sub receptor is also an

immunoglobulin, specifically immunoglobulin D. Now we'll talk about major histocompatibility molecules, MHCs. There's three different types, one, two, and three, and we'll discuss those. We'll also talk about the T-cell receptor and its important interaction. And then we'll talk about

different chemicals and molecules that are involved in cellular interaction, pedocrine interaction within the immune response. Important molecules like cytokines, which we have discussed, and we'll talk more about those and we talk about chemokines and how they attract phagocytes different

populations of lymphocytes to the infected area or inflamed area we discussed adhesion molecules and we also seen and talked about cd molecules or cluster of differentiation molecules which we discussed last semester more specifically during the histology of the immune response but cd molecules

plays very important roles a lot of them are receptors they can help us distinguish between different white blood cells and sometimes they have a role like cd47 in protecting cells from being phagocytized or cd59 which protects from complement system let's start out by talking about immunoglobulins

immunoglobulins are basically soluble proteins that are usually found in serum but in other locations too as we will discuss the term they they're said to be responsible for what's called the humoral immune response and the word humor actually means soluble or can dissolve and that's where

that came from immunoglobulins have specific affinity and they bind specifically to an epitope on an antigen so an antigen typically is a large foreign substance. It's in any foreign substance that elicits any response. But antigens typically have many different epitopes and these epitopes

can all potentially bind to antibodies. Just like the figure you see on the right side here, there's one antigen with multiple epitopes that cannot be displayed. Antibodies or immunoglobulins are responsible for what's called antigen antibody reactions. We'll talk about those things like

immobilizing an antigen, sometimes by cross -linking it, neutralizing it, preventing it from doing its job or upsliding it, tagging it for destruction. Let's discuss the four different types of antigen antibody reactions that we typically see. The first

one's called the precipitant reaction. This is actually kind of an older type of laboratory technique that people used to use where you would add equal amount or different amounts of antibody and antigen and you keep doing that till you finally get to the point where you have almost equal

altitude and then when that happens the complex gets large enough that they actually precipitate so this used to be the way one of the old ways to actually determine the concentration of antibodies to figure out how much a person has antibodies now we have of course different techniques

and better techniques that can help us with that other injured antibody reactions we see are agglutination or sometimes called cross-linking people sometimes call it clumping but be careful that terms not very accurate so an agglutinated reaction typically involves the large

antibodies, IgM or IgA. They have to be, you know, the IgM is a pentamer, IgG, I'm sorry, IgA is a dimer, and they have the ability to bind, basically, when they bind to epitopes on different antigens, they bring these antigens together. There's a picture on the

right side there top showing you how, for example, agglutination reactions can cross-link red blood cells, and then you can actually see a precipitate. That's how we do an typing of blood when you add MTA, MTAB and figure out the person's blood type, basically you see an actual

agglutination reaction that you can use in concede with your ***** eye. Neutralization mainly occurs by IgG but it can also be done by IgA and they're both effective at it and that basically they bind to a molecule and neutralize it such as a virus preventing

it from binding to our receptors for example. a lot of times this is kind of like the gold of immunity you've probably heard of neutralizing antibodies and so these are antibodies that would neutralize other substances like viruses and last but not least

antibody reactions may involve opsonization in this case the antibody is not neutralizing the substance or agglutinating it but instead tagging it to be destroyed in my other cell that's referred to as opsonization so this is membranes was similar to how complement is very effective at

doing that, that we talked about in the last lecture. Let's discuss the structure of immunoglobulins, organ or antibodies. All immunoglobulins are made out of four large polypeptides. There are two pretty big ones and those are called the heavy chain and two lighter ones which are called the

light chains and those are typically joined by disulfide bonds based on the antibody heavy chain we actually have five different antibody isotypes so these are the antibody isotypes you see right here mu gamma alpha delta and epsilon and those correspond different type of antibodies.

For example, mu is IgM, gamma is IgG, alpha is IgA, delta is IgD, and epsilon is IgE. There's also one convenient way to set to distinguish among antibodies or different sections of the antibody molecule is by digesting it with the protease called

Papin. Papin digestion splits the antibody into the FAV portion and that's the portion that has the antibody binding fragment and the FC portion which contains the constant region so what's the constant region versus the antibody binding fragment so if you see the antibody also has what's called

the variable region that's the region basically on on top where the light chain is and the heavy chain that's where it binds the epitope but on the other hand the big chunk of that heavy chain is usually mostly constant it doesn't really change between antibody another unless it's a different ice

type but the variable origin always changes because that's gonna depend on the epitope it it binds to it so anyway the papindigestion sometimes you know gives us these feb and fd portions and you when we talk about phagocytes binding to the FC portion, we're referring to phagocytes binding to

the to the constant region basically of the antibody. Let's talk about different antibodies. So the first one we'll talk about is IgM. So IgM is the Mu isotype, like we discussed before, as you can see on the figure on the right side. It's a pentamer,

it's a five-membered structure, all joined by disulfide bonds. So it's the largest antibody. It's secreted in plasma and usually secreted as part of the primary adaptive immune response. Afterwards IgM usually wanes

and IgG take place. Sometimes we find IgM as a monomer on B cell surface, but that's more rare. This is the antibody responsible for the egg alternation reaction because it has the ability to cross-link multiple antigens and has also

the ability to immobilize them because once cross-linking of these antigens take place in this large antibody, the complex becomes so big that it cannot really move properly in the body. It's also very good at complement fixation because of the multiple FC fragments

you know this case five and it makes sense because it's one of the first antibodies that are made so it's good to have complement working that way and of course because of its huge size it cannot cross the placenta next antibody we'll talk about is IGD which is the isotype delta this is a monomeric

antibody and it's predominantly the B cell receptor of course it's important because that's how the b cell recognizes an epitope and this is how the antigen selects for the correct b cells by specifically binding to these structural antibodies igd and then of course they differentiate the plasma

cells and make the same exact type of antibody. IgM first, then an IgG afterwards. IgG, or crizotype gamma, is probably the most common antibody in serum. It's a monomer usually, can be found both on the surface of B cells, but it's mostly secreted.

It is the second antibody that's released during the adaptomy response, so that would be your secondary, so you have the primary immune response, but then the secondary immune response, IgG starts to rise, has the ability to neutralize, has the ability to

opsonize and activate complement. It's also involved in some hypersensitivity reaction and antibody -dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity. So basically when IgG can actually bind to a certain cell, it can label it for killing. And we'll talk about that reaction

at the end of this lecture. It's also the antibody that crosses the placenta. Again, very versatile, very important antibody, and typically when it's detected it suggests that immunity has been established through an infection. IGA, the isotype alpha,

is a monomer also found in serum but it's also found as a dimer in secretions throughout the body like milk, tears, saliva, mucous membranes, of course a part of the malt, the mucosal associated lymphoid tissue. It's the most antibody produced daily constantly being shed

and of course very important in protecting us from pathogens, has the ability to neutralize, block viral entry, etc. IGE with the isotype epsilon is actually the lowest one in serum. It's a monomer and it's typically absorbed on mast cells in eosinophils

and it causes the release of histamine and also activates eosinophils to attack worms. So in that regard it's effective but it's also involved in allergic reactions are basically type 1 hypersensitivities, specifically the immediate type,

also sometimes called. And we'll discuss these and we discussed those last semester too, so we'll be able to go back and revisit this topic because of its importance. We have discussed and talked a little bit about what's called antibody -dependent cell mediated

cytotoxicity. This can happen, by the way, predominantly by IgG, but IgM can also do this too, but to a lesser extent. And so typically antibody can tag bacteria, parasites, worms, etc., which can attract natural killer cells. And we talked about natural killer cells in the last

lecture, the innate, and how they display both CAR and CAR receptors to detect and be able to kill pathogens or our own cells if they are infected by a virus. and eosinofils can also mediate interaction. This is an important mechanism to clear pathogens of our body. In the next three slides

we're going to discuss the hypersensitivities that are antibody mediated, basically type 1, type 2 and type 3. Type 4 we'll talk later because type 4 is not antibody mediated as you already know, it's cell mediated. So that we'll discuss later. So hypersensitivities as sometimes we collectively

call them in layman words other allergies but the word hypersensitivity as i emphasize to you guys is the correct immunological and medical term but of course as you talk to patients you have to explain it in terms of allergies either way type one is also sometimes called immediate

hypersensitivity and that term comes because it can happen almost instantly once the person has been primed already. It's IgE mediated, mainly IgE sensitized, and it detects an epitope on an allergen and then mast cells and piocerophils are activated which produce tons of histamine and we end

up with the classical reactions you know anaphylaxis could possibly become anaphylaxis but not always. And that's a that's a type 1 hypersensitivity. Again, I have to be primed which means there needs to be memory cells to produce IgE. You just cannot be

from the first time. So we've discussed how antibody -dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity, especially directed against infected cells, bacteria and parasites, is very effective and part of the normal neural response. But at the same time it can develop into a hypersensitivity, a

type 2 hypersensitivity if it's directed at our own healthy cells. And so typically it's an IgM-IgG interaction, especially towards cell membranes or matrix, usually complement natural killer cells involved. Examples of that would be like a hemolytic anemia that happens

from mismatch. Somebody given a transfusion, let's say, which is an incompatible blood type, you end up binding of antibodies to like basement membranes resulting in inflammation and death and necrosis and tissue injury. Another example of that is Gravis

disease and last thing is Gravis. Also rheumatic fever is considered a type 2 hypersensitivity. Type 3 hypersensitivity is typically when we have a lot of immune complexes that are circulating. Typically lots of antigen -antibody complexes. A lot of

times it's pretty much mediated by IgG and these complexes can deposit in blood vessels causing vasculitis. These type of reactions can be either localized and in that case it's referred to as Arthas reaction. Usually you have like an abscess or necrotizing vasculitis or it can be a

systemic type of reaction in the case of systemic it's usually referred to as serum sickness this terminology dates back to the times when people used to use convalescent plasma which is you know currently used for sometimes COVID treatment and these plasmas can cause a reaction usually like for

example taking horse serum injecting into a human we end up reacting to the foreign serum or foreign antibodies, like antibodies for another animal, and that results in serum sickness. So again, it could be exogenous, non-human antibodies, or drug-induced, like penicillin can do this, or endogenous,

like systemic lupus, erythromatosis, or sometimes it's called lupus. We just discussed the antibody-mediated hypersensitivities. There's still one more type, type 4 which is cell mediated and we'll talk about that after we discuss the cell mediating your response.

We'll switch gears a little bit and talk about MHC molecules and the role in adaptive immunity. So MHC molecules are basically the same terminology as human leukocyte antigen, or at least in humans we call them human leukocyte antigens. MHC molecules are found in

all animals including humans. There are mainly three types, MHC class 1, MHC class 2, and MHC class 3. The class 3 are basically the complement. Code for some of the complement components are focused on the B-more in MHC class 1 and MHC class 2.

MHC class 1 is found on all nucleated cells, for example. So you don't see them on red blood cells because red blood cells are not nucleated, but all cells with the nuclei in the body will have MHC class 1. So it's easy to remember that, they were everywhere basically

all of our cells have to display msc class one basically to report whether they're not uh are viral infected or they have tumors or to simply make sure that they are self so there's one way we can recognize that ours this is our cell versus this is a foreign substance

again coded by hla a b z um you know there's almost like a hundred alleles on each locus gives rise to many different combinations and it is important when we have transplants or from one person to another let's say organ that the MHCs especially the MHC1s are compatible or

at least as compatible as they can be to to prevent you know graft rejection. MHC class IIs on the other hand are only and mainly expressed on antigen presenting cells you know there would be some like dendritic cells and macrophages, but you'll only

find them, you'll also find them on B cells, some activated T cells, and if you remember these specialized epithelial, thymic epithelial cells, that actually involved in, you know, negative and positive selection or education of thymocytes, if you recall from the

histology lecture of last semester. Again, what do those do? They are involved in antigen presentation. Very important step. You cannot activate the adaptive immune response or specifically the T helper cell without an antigen presenting cell presenting that foreign antigen on the MHC class 2.

So we have discussed the MHC class 1 molecule. Let's turn and talk a little bit about the T cell receptor. A very important receptor, of course, it's crucial for T cell recognition, interaction with antigen, activation. The T cell receptor is a heterodimer. It's made up of two

molecules that are different. The most common type of T cell receptor is the alpha beta type. There's also the lesser common gamma delta. Usually the T cell receptor is not alone on the surface. It's typically associated with the CD3 and costage differentiation, which helps with signal transduction.

Very important thing about the T cell receptor is that it's restricted to MHC. It has to bind fragments on either MHC class 1 or MHC class 2. Without that, there's really no interaction. So a T cell receptor cannot engage antigen by itself. If it's the... and

again, And in addition to that, there are also either a CD4 receptor, and that's in the case of T helper cells, or a CD8 receptor, that is in the case of T cytotoxic cells. So typically on the surface of a T cell, you would see T cell receptor, CD3, and either CD4 and CD8, and

those would interact with either MHC class 1 or MHC class 2. If it's a CD8 T-tyotoxic, that's probably MHC class 1. and if it's a t -helper it's a CD4 MHC class 2. We talked about these cellular interactions, we talked about cytokines, basically those are low molecular weight soluble

proteins which act as messengers and they're prominent in the most common way by which different cells communicate in our body. We talked about chemokines, they're basically cytokines that are chemo-attractant, they basically they allow phagocytes to home in and other locusites to a different

site of inflammation. We talked a little bit about integrins and selectins and their role in allowing phagocytes to get to the site they need to do. And we also talked about CD molecules in a cluster differentiation. And a lot of times they

can help us identify different cells, they can indicate the function. There's been lots of CD molecules identified. and of course the most common ones are like CD3, CD4, CD8, and they were common ones we just discussed last semester, they were in a table,

make sure you hear those, I remember you knew some of them, especially the ones that identify certain type of cells. Next we're going to talk about how the adaptive immune response is activated. So that immune response mainly is activated through the activation

of T helper cells. That process is a very time consuming event with a lot of checks and balances. It takes a good week and a half for that process to take place and that's intentional. You don't want the immune response or especially that immune response to just

be activated at a whim. It really has to take a lot and ensure that you've exhausted all other potential issues such as innate immunity maybe the pathogen has been resolved by them so and you know as we discussed the main cell that controls and regulates the adaptive immune response whether

it may be the hemodal or the cell mediated is the t helper cell and all the subsets that come with that and remember MHC class one is required sorry one and two is required for lymphocyte activation because the T cell receptor is MHC restricted so

there's no activation of any T cell simply by itself. It has to be through a MHC molecule. Let's discuss briefly MHC class 2 presentation and we'll discuss MHC 1 presentation. So with MHC class 2, remember MHC molecules are restricted

to antigen presenting cells only and you know B cells have them too and few T cells have them but predominantly it's dendritic cells and macrophages dendritic cells seem to be the most important regard to antigen presentation they play the largest role they act as sentinels by being in lymph

nodes constantly monitoring lymph for the presence of anything funny typically dendritic cells are able to phagocytize that engine. It's an actin-dependent. When it's processed inside the alendritic cells, you know, basically phagosomes use the lysosome. You chop it to pieces and

then you take that antigen and fuse it with MHC class 2 molecule displayed on the cell surface which then it can interact with the proper, in this case, T helper cell, which is RCD4 positive cells. MSC class 2 can display both self and non-self and sometimes displaying

self can lead to tolerance. So remember we discussed that earlier last semester where MSC class 2 usually is displayed for T cells to help them with selection and to mature T cells. and, of course, displaying of foreign antigens so you can activate them.

MFD class 1 presentation is processed differently. MFD class 1 is found in all nucleated cells in the body. Basically, if there's an inside antigen or if there's a foreign substance inside the cell or the cell is a tumorous cell, any cell in our body will basically take that

intracetral antigen, which is typically tagged with ubiquitin or the protein of ubiquitin. this will allow the proteasomes inside the cell to destroy it or chop it to pieces which is then sent to the endoplasma reticulum and then the Golgi and then in the Golgi these

antigens are then combined with MHC class 1 and then they are displayed on the cell surface hoping for of course a T-cell toxic cell which is a big positive to recognize it and if it is let's say a protein, then death of that cell will incur afterwards. As we've said several times

now, the T helper cell is really the pivotal cell when it comes to the adaptive immune response. Now this is the reason like a disease like HIV that targets the helper cells basically wipes out all the adaptive immune response. So T helper cells, also known as CD4 positive

cells, only recognize MHC2 associated antigens. They form the interaction between the naive T helper cell and the endogen presenting cell like a dendritic cell is referred to as the immunological synapse. A picture of that is seen on the side here showing how

the different receptor interaction everything that's involved including cell adhesion molecules in addition to CD3 and CD28 CD80 co-stimulatory signal. So again, notice here there's the T cell receptor, usually the alpha-beta kind binding to the MHC class II with

an end in the middle, supporting that as a CD4 receptor, and in addition to that, CD3 or two CD3 receptors are associated with T cell receptor, and this This requires the co -stimulatory signal. The co-stimulatory, the CD28, results in stabilization of that synapse.

Without that, you're gonna have very weak interaction and probably abortion of that interaction and that activation, or energy, basically. In some cases, it can lead to apoptosis, too. Remember, energy for a T-cell, meaning if a T-cell becomes numb,

it does no longer recognize that antigen, does not react. The first contact of the foreign substance with the T-cell will help prime it, and that, of course, involves the production of cytokines. Depending on the cytokine, we'll end up with different populations of T

-cells. The original progenitor T-cell becomes then an active T-cell, and it can go different ways. It can become a Th1, Th2, or Th17, or also the other Th helper cells that we typically don't discuss, since there's at least like nine of them. But depending on the cytokine profile, which

they will receive from the antigen presenting cell, they will differentiate into these different kinds. A lot of times differentiating into one kind inhibits differentiation of the other kind. And even when that happens, this does not mean that you're always going to have that species of cell.

These subtypes may change. But so let's say if the antigen presenting cell produces interferon gamma. Typically the naive T helper cell will differentiate into TH1. If it's IL-4, IL-10, it'll differentiate to TH2. If it's interleukin-6 or transforming growth factor beta, that's T helper 17.

And these cytokines inhibit the other type of cells. For example, interferon gamma inhibits differentiation of T helper 2 cells. And you know, there's been recently more recognition of the presence of what's called memory T cells which have high expression of the core receptor and those

seem to last in the body and confirm immunity down the road similar to memory B cells which make antibodies. Let's discuss the T cytotoxic cell activation or CD8 cell. So CD8 cells will recognize antigenal MHC class 1. This interaction results in them in expressing IL-2 receptor and then once they interact

with the T helper 1 cell, T helper 1 cells will produce IL-2 which then binds the IL-2 receptor that's been overexpressed in CD8 and this helps with activation of that T cytotoxic cell. When that occurs T cytotoxic cells will then engage Hd antigen on different cells. Usually these

are intracellular antigens and as a result they recognize that cell as being affected. They will produce perforins which are proteins that poke holes in that membrane of that cell and also produce granzymes which actually induce apoptosis. And this is how a T

cytotoxic cell becomes effectively activated. these are toxic cells can also engage you know infected cells by themselves too without the need for a T helper one cell but that type of side engagement so to speak is really much weaker and not as effective as within the absence

of TH1 activation and interleukin 2 release let's talk about B cell activation B cell activation similar to T cell toxic cell activation can recognize antigen in the association of MHC class 2 or the T helper cell or without it. But usually it's much more effective in the presence of a TH2 or

a TH17 cell. So typically what happens is the B cell receptor will recognize the antigen using its actual B cell receptor and then results in endocytosis of that antigen and then the antigen is presented in MHC to a CD4 positive cell and this happens with T dependent antigens which are typically

proteins because proteins can be processed that way. Again the B cell can engage either a TH2 or a TH17 depending on the type of pathogen. This results in either reproduction of IL-4 in the case of TH2 or IL-6, which is the case of TH17, and that will cause the B cell

to become active and differentiate to a plasma cell and produce antibodies. IL, sorry, an immunoglobulin E or IgE if it's TH2 or IgG or IgM if it's TH17. And some of those differentiated B cells will become memory cells, so they can engage with antigen down the road.

So this is in the case of this is the most common type of antigens, protein antigens, which are also referred to as T-dependent antigens. But B cells can also engage what's called T-independent antigens. A lot of these are polysaccharides or lipid in nature. So those antigens are not

typically processed the same way inside cells and so but at the same time we have to respond to them because they are foreign antigens. So how do we do that? We have basically B cells that can do without the help of T helper cells, and those are referred to as T independent antigens.

They can be either subdivided the T1 or T2. The T1s are pretty much like LPS. These are very effective, what's called B cell mitogens. These are super activator of B cells. They can activate them by binding to receptors other than the B cell receptor and they're

very strong activators. And then we have T2 antigens and those are the polysaccharides or the lipids and they basically only stimulate mature B cells. And to clear those antigens of course you also need complement and so on to help. So those would be T2 and T should be something like capsules.

So terminology we've used many times before. We basically divide the adaptive immune response into two arms, the heomodal and the cell mediated. The cell mediated immune response is usually specifically designed to address intracellular pathogens.

Pathogens basically or whenever the pathogen is found inside the cell and those are also responsible for type 4 hypersensitivities while the hemoral immune response mediates itself through the production of antibodies and that's predominantly to against exocerebral pathogens or

whatever that pathogen is on the outside of the cell and those are responsible like we talked already and discussed in this lecture for type 1, 2 and 3 hypersensitivities. Now this distinction between exocerebral pathogen intercellular pathogen is important but sometimes

you heard me say if it's on the outside if it's on the inside and what i mean by that is viruses by definition are intercellular pathogens but when a virus kills a cell and comes to the outside it has to go in mind to another cell in that transition it is on the outside so

that means that virus can be blocked by an antibody so in other words even classic intercellular pathogens at some point of their life cycle they spend time outside in the excess cellular space and then you they could be targeted that way um you know and the so the cell mediated immune

response that's your th1 cells and your immoral immune response that is our th2 th17 so so far we have discussed type 1 type 2 and type uh 3 hypersensitivities let's discuss type 4 hypersensitivities also used to be called delayed type hypersensitivity and the reason

for that it usually comes 48 to 72 hours after encountering antigen at any given time now this is a th1 a macrophage induced type of inflammation kind of cell mediated because it does require th1 cells it can be either a result of topical interaction let's say contact dermatitis got in contact with

poison iv um china you know metal allergies for example but also you can get a reaction from that and a measurable reaction and this is a good way for us to detect microbes for example we inject you can inject the protein purotony derivative the tuberculin test or the skin test or the ppd

test and detect the presence or if the person has been exposed to mycobacteria you can also do it for for fungal infections and other infections like leishmania candida so we can do fungal skin tests and look for type 4 hypersensitivity and use that particular reaction

to detect these or survey even these type of pathogens in a given population so it's important tool so to speak let's talk a little bit about immunological memory because it's an important concept Now we spoke about the role of memory T cells and

these are really important cells and they seem to also provide us with lasting immunity. Their importance, how they work, and the role of immunity is still under investigation. But classically we always looked at immunological memory as in the

presence of antibodies. This is again not a complete picture because as we just discussed and i want you to understand that and because as we discussed we there's also t memory cells that's important for example when people are discussing whether or not somebody has

memory let's say or develop memory after they have covet because a lot of times when we measure that memory is we measure whether or not they have antibodies so that's not the whole picture so it's important to realize that anyway um immunological memory is can be resolved from prior

exposure to the antigen. That is referred to as the primary immune response. So then the secondary immune response develops the memory now. So as we talked before, when a B cell encounter antigen for the first time, they differentiate the plasma cells with

the help of TH2 or TH17, and then but then some of these plasma cells become memory cells. So it's important to remember that it's for half distinction between the two. So the primary immune response usually takes longer time typically two weeks

before we reach peak antibody formation. On the other hand the secondary immune response is almost instant because of the presence of memory cells and this is the goal of vaccination right there is to induce the primary response so that when you encounter the antigen again

you don't have to wait two weeks to develop the response you're already ready to go in many cases you can block injury of the pathogen even at the get-go at the mucous membrane before they arrive now there's also isotype switching in this particular instance so with the primary response

you start out with the igm isotype and then you switch to igg with the secondary immune response it's immediately idg and you're ready to go um one thing to note here just something that's interesting and it's kind of important that b cells do what these cells do as they interact an

antigen or an epitome of an antigen over time they undergo what's called affinity maturation what that means is the antigens will start selecting for the uh for the antibodies that combine the best. And this is usually created by the actual presence of hyper mutations in the genes that code

for the antibodies, those VHVL genes. So over time, the antibodies that we make become better and better and better and binding with the epitope on the antigen with more affinity. That's what you want. You don't want a very weak binding, because weak binding does not elicit a

good immune response. But again, this only happens during the secondary and as time goes by, which is why our initial human immune response is typically not a very strong one. Let's discuss a little bit immunoregulation because this is a very important topic. We have kind

of talked about these concepts here and there, but let's try to summarize them here in one place. We've talked about the concept of tolerance. We will have a lecture especially that discusses tolerance and autoimmunity which is a really important topic

again one of the things that can induce tolerance in cells is for example especially in t cells and cause what's called energy is the absence of the cg28 b7 cost immature signal so the absence of that signal can trigger energy but there's other things that can do that and

there'll be a lecture For example, it is absence of a stimulatory cytokine, etc. Also, let's not forget a very important role of T-regulatory cells. T-regulatory cells are actually subtype of T-helper cells that specifically suppress the immune system. These can be called

actually T-suppressors. We no longer use that term because we realize they do more than just suppression. They actually can, they really help with regulation. They are CD4-positive, like they're T-helfer cells, but the only way to really distinguish

them from other T -helfer cells is by the presence of the CD25 and expression of a transcription factor, specifically called FOXP3. That's really the only way to push them out. There's also CD8-positive or T-cytotoxic spacer cells, which can help

prevent graft rejection and can help prevent our own body from attacking itself, formation of autoimmune diseases. So these combination of many mechanisms and this is just a really brief introduction guys to this can help us with tolerance and tolerating our

self-antigens and not have the immune system just go haywire. Again there'll be a lecture on this. We also talked about how how the different cells, Th1, Th2, and Th17, can inhibit each other in a new response by basically using their signature cytokine. So, for example, TNF gamma

that's produced by Th1 inhibits the other, Th2, and Th17, and so on. So that's a very important way, that way you don't have all of these cells dominating. But do keep in mind that this is dynamic. At some point, for example a th1 response may dominate but then it can regress and a

th2 then dominates or th17 okay um we already discussed that th17 is by definition a pro -inflammatory type of response that seems to be damaging but you know understanding that information for example we've been able to identify il-70 which is the

signature cytokine of that cell as being involved in conditions that are psoriasis, and if you block IL-70, it can actually help patients. And so the more we understand these mechanisms, how they're used, so we can regulate it, we can

help a lot of patients that have both autoimmune and inflammatory diseases that are caused by the malfunction, so to speak, of the immune system. This slide shows different types of adaptive e-responses involved of clearances of different antigens.

It's kind of a summary for you, but it's a pretty good one. It just shows you, for example, like neutralizing antibodies can be used to neutralize viruses, bacteria, whether it's intercellular or extracelular, protozoans, whether they are intercellular or extracelular,

but don't seem to work at all against fungi and worms. The hemoglobin response in general doesn't seem to work at all with fungi. At the same time, it shows you that the cell -mediated immune response or the toxic T cells

are very effective against viruses because they are intercellular and intercellular bacteria. It also shows that complement and obstinization are very good at tackling excellular bacteria. Complement can also be good at taking out specifically

enveloped viruses. So this is a good just summary for you for your own information. So in summary, we have discussed the adaptive immune response in this two -type, two-part lecture. Predominantly talked about immunoglobulin structure,

function, the different types as for isotypes, and how are they involved in the type 1, type 2, and type 3 hypersensitivities, which are antibody-mediated. We talked about different important molecules, MSC class 1 and 2, discussed T-cell receptor structure and function, interaction,

associated receptors, its role in immunological synapse, We talked about the B-cell receptor, its structure, which is basically IGT, antibody, and its function in important recognizing antigens. We talked about how T-cells, even besides specifically helper cells and different kinds, are activated

and also how B-cells are activated. We talked about both the humanoidal and the cell-mediated immune response and the different subtypes of T-helper cells 1, 2, and 17. We discussed at the end immunological memory and the importance of a secondary immune response and role of B cells

in that, and talked a little briefly about T memory cells. And we also talked about immune regulation and how tolerance is important. And at the end, I just introduce you to a clinical case, which we will follow up in the office hour and discuss

it more together.