Hi everyone, I am Dr. Matthew Heller. I am excited to be giving you all another lecture. Today's lecture is going to be in the DPR category. So this is a DPR lecture to prepare you for DPR lab. A lot of what we go through here and the physical exam skills will be use in the lab for DPR. We'll also go over some other diagnosis as well. If you all have any questions for me, here is my email address. Feel free to shoot me an email. Again, I am going to present the lecture regarding the DPR. We're going to talk about history taking. We're going to talk about physical exam of the spine. So we had a long lecture, it was pretty long. So we had a lecture about maybe four lectures ago, and we talked a lot about the spine, cervical spine, thoracic spine, lumbar spine, a lot about the differential diagnosis. We're going to talk more in detail about the history taken in the physical exam in this lecture. We're going to talk about subjective, right, subjective is everything the patient is telling you, and objective is your physical exam finding. We're going to talk about normal versus abnormal, we're going to talk about the appropriate way to document, right, and document is always very important, right, you're going to be doing it your entire career, every patient you ever see, you're going to want to make sure you document as much as you can, everything you can, the most important thing as well. So, let's talk about normal and abnormal, and I'm going to show you some documentation as we relate it to the OMM case, we will talk about it later on. So who are we? We are the Red Wolves and the Bears, so hello down in Joanville, I hope you all are doing very well. Hello to the Bears up in New York, Long Island. We haven't done this yet, but this is a brief, this is basically a brief roll call. So if you're down in Jonesville and you're studying in the library, let's hear you roar. And if you're in the New York library, let's hear you roar. All right, so real quick, we will talk about Mass Day, right, because right now this lecture is actually a couple of weeks before the actual Mass Day, and everybody, it's a pretty exciting time. So what I am going to do, I'm just going to change over to my pen. So this is an example of Mass Day. This is how we all have it up in New York. So basically, you're all going to go up and and get an envelope at the front of the at the front stage you're gonna go up you're gonna get an envelope and then when the right time comes the dean is gonna announce it that it's time to open up the envelopes Here we go, three, two, one! ...the day where you find out where you're going and what speciality you're going. So real quick if you could just hit pause, don't hit pause yet, if you could just close your eyes um when we hit pause you're going to close your eyes just imagine yourself where where you're going to be on math day who you're going to be with what are you going to be specializing uh where will you be heading to right and um and why did you decide to go into medicine so just hit the pause just kind of close your eyes and just think about being in that situation and I'm opening that envelope. I hit the pause and we are back, right? So we are back, but before we get the mask day, we do have to go through this DPR lecture, right? So when we get a history, right? Whether it's the back, the neck, the joint, very, very common complaint is the patient is going to say, doc, I have pain, right? The patient's going to say, I have pain, right? So that you want to do is say where is the pain right you're going to have the patient locate the pain right is the pain going to be within the joint or is it going to be um outside the joint all right so if that coming in with elbow pain or knee pain right it's good to know whether it's articular or it's going to be extra -articular right is it inside the joint or the outside of the joint um is it acute versus chronic is it something that just happened at the basketball game today i was running went for a layup landed hurt my knee or there's something that's been going on for maybe three, four, five months already or even longer. You want to know if it's inflammatory or is it non-inflammatory. Localized or is it diffused, is it only one joint or is it multiple joints. You also want to know is any associated symptoms. So a joint pain that has a fever is a lot different than a joint pain that's without a fever. So a joint pain with a fever might suggest that maybe there's some kind of infection going on. where a joint pain without a fever might suggest, okay, maybe there is no infection, right? So it's something that you want to ask, is there any associated fevers, chills, anything systemic that might make it more of a systemic diagnosis. So that's joint pain, and then the next pain and back pain. All right, you want to know, is it a radicular type of pain or is it non -radicular? We want to know the OPQRST, right? So we're going to talk a little bit more about low back pain, right? So is the pain midline or the pain off the midline, right? Back pain could mean a lot of things for a lot of different people, right? Back pain could mean pain in the buttock versus back pain could be like pain in the trapezius muscle. So we want to know is there any radiation into the buttock or is there any radiation into the lower extremities? Is there any associated numbness, tingling, weakness, right? Is there any parathesia, right? um leg pain that resolve with dress or lumbar forward flexion right so what position makes the pain better what makes the pain worse um you want to know is any associated bowel or bladder dysfunction right red flag symptoms right they say doc i'm also having some bladder or bowel dysfunction that i never had before i'm having incontinence right that could be a very very serious different lead to a very serious differential diagnosis such as quarter equine syndrome that we talked about with impingements on S2S4 okay so that's something that's more emergent or if they say doc i have shadow anesthesia they won't tell you i have shadow anesthesia but you'll ask them do you have any numbness on the inside of your legs upper legs and they're going to say yeah doc i do have it's feeling very numb right maybe they have urinary retention or overflow so anything that's a red red flag, right, we want to make sure we roll it out in these types of patients, right, are they older and now they're also having significant weight loss, right, again red flag symptoms, right, so more about red flag symptoms we talked about is, so the fever, the chills, not everything is infected, weight loss, right, we want to make sure, is there any weight loss, are they not eating, are they having overall weakness, if they're having Weakness, is it specifically from one side or is it bilateral? We want to find out there are decreased or limited movement. We want to find out what were you able to do before and what you are not able to do now. Timing, acute versus chronic, when does it begin? Have you ever had this pain before? What aggravates the pain and what relieves the pain? A lot of this has to do with getting a good thorough history taken. And all this stuff, all this information is going to go in your HPI, right? So we want to know if you're doing any activity that you haven't done before, right? That's significant to know. Maybe they're doing a new activity. Maybe they decided after 20 years of not running, right, that they are going to come out and run a marathon within a week, right? So somebody that's like that, okay, it might be a little too much too soon, right? So maybe they did a little bit too much. Now we're thinking about an overuse injury. So some red flag symptoms, right? So back pain over the age of 50 or less than the age of 20, right? So again, just because they have back pain and they're over 50, right, doesn't mean it's automatically a red flag, but something that we need to keep in the back of our mind, that it has the potential to be a more serious diagnosis, right, that we need to think of. Do they have a history of cancer, right? Now they have a history of cancer, now they have severe back pain, a longer weight loss, right, now you're reaping something more serious. Unexplained, unexplained, key word right there, unexplained, weight loss, fever, or a decline in general health, pain lasting more than a month, or not responding to the current treatment, and pain that you get at night, or increase with any kind of resting activity. Some more red flag symptoms, so if they have a history of IV drug use, IV drug use, maybe they're immunocompromised, they have the presence of an active infection or HIV, long-term steroid use, now we worry about bone density being decreased, channel anesthesia, bladder, bowel incontinence we already talked about and these are something that's very alarming and we don't want to just dismiss it right so even though they come in with low back pain and they start telling you that they have bowel and bladder incontinence right don't just keep going back to the back pain right find out there's something that's new right this urinating constant is something that's new that started along with the uh with the back pain there's any correlation between the two and any neurological symptoms or progressive neurological deficits So we go through the reviewer system, right, very, very important, we go through the reviewer system, right, everybody's going to have their favorite system that they want to hit, right, on the DPR, as of now, on the self note, we require at least three different systems and at least two symptoms for every system, right, you can do more, it doesn't hurt to do more, right, but you want to make sure you keep it nice and complete so that when you're seeing patients, right, and you're presenting where you have a nitro review system, right? So it goes, again, vascular, musculoskeletal, neural, endocrine, GU, FUD, then for frequency, urgency, and dyspheria, right? We'll learn more about that in the fall when you go through ******* urinary system, and psychiatric depression, anxiety. Um, so the physical exam should be systematic, right? So we just talked about getting a really good HPI. I just threw a lot of information at you in the last eight minutes, right? But that's how, that's how to get a good, thorough HPI, right? Make sure OP, QRSC, right? You guys all have your own mnemonic, make sure you know a very detailed history about the back pain. And I didn't mention it, but also worth noting, did this patient ever have back pain before, right? Did they ever get imaging done in the past, right? And these are all questions that the attendings are going to ask you when you're presenting to them when you're on your third-year, fourth -year clerkship, right? They're going to want to know, right, this is not part of UOP, but they want to know, did they ever get any imaging before, right? Why are they coming in now and why did they wait three months, right? Is it because the pain is getting worse? Is it because the pain is not improving with the self -home treatment that they've been doing? What were the self-home treatment? What were they taking, medication? So again, systematic, just to make it easier on ourselves to remember exactly what we need to add in the physical exam. Everybody always forget about inspection. That's probably the most important thing, is to be able to look. Look and see if there's any signs of trauma. Look at the muscles. Is there any asymmetry in the muscles on the left side versus the right side? Right, maybe there's some ecchymosis or bruising, right, maybe there is some redness or erythema, right, maybe there is something, maybe there is some kind of nodule that's visible, whatever it might be, right, just take a look, right, take a look. And then after that, we're going to palpate, we're going to check the range of motion, active, right, and passive, and then we're trend testing, and then we will go into special testing. So we're going to assess the four signs of inflammation, right? We're going to talk about swelling, right, versus warmth, versus redness, and pain tenderness, right? If it's pain tenderness, is it focal pain tenderness, which might be suggested maybe they have some kind of injury or trauma, or is it more diffused tenderness? And now if they have diffused tenderness and warmth, right, over any kind of, like a thickened synovium, right, that might suggest maybe they have arthritis or infection, right? So you got to find out, is there a history of trauma? Is there a history of anything else that might be infectious, right? Then we're thinking about difusing, difused tendinous versus scoccal. Again, injury versus trauma. So examination of the cervical spine, right? First thing we always want to do is take a look, So, by inspection, it's to reveal that there is sufficient cervical dosage. Remember the curvature that we know. You want to observe the observation. You want to observe basically the position and know how the patient is carrying their head in relationship to their body. And sometimes if their head is rotated, not head rotated, if the head moves a little bit more anterior, sometimes the head could be more anterior to the rest of the body. A lot of it has to do with positioning of the head. We see a lot more everybody on their cell phone. I always say that if you go onto the subway and there are ten people on the subway in New York City, there are ten people on the subway, there are going to be nine people that are looking down at their phone and there's going to be one person that's looking up at the ceiling sleeping. Every one of them at some point is going to have some kind of neck pain because it's not actually the greatest posture. So we want to make sure that we keep maintaining good posture, especially if we're on our phone, if we're on the computer. You want to make sure that the computer, the top one-third of the screen is eye level. Abnormal rotation. So coming back to eye level at the computer, you want to make sure they have a good ergonomic at work. And that's part of your history taken. What do you do for work? Are you on the computer all day or are you moving around? if they are on the computer, do they have their ergonomic, right? They're looking straight ahead at the top one-third of the screen, or do they look on the laptop and they're looking down the entire time. We're going to look for any kind of abnormal rotation, side bending, and the muscle bulk of the trapezius, deltoid, SCM muscles should be symmetric. So this takes it back when I was just in residency. So luckily I went to an osteopathic program and a couple of OMMs by one of my colleagues and we fixed this back up and I was able to get right back to seeing patients. But this is excessive left side bending of the cervical spine because it's not supposed to go down like that. So we name it to what side it is moving to. So we do inspecting. Next we're going to do palpation. Palpation of the cervical spine can be done with the patient sitting down or standing up. You're going to palpate the spinous process with your thumbs, and you're going to note any kind of pain, swelling, step-off, pain, swelling, step-off, is there any kind of tenderness, anything that could indicate there's any kind of cervical spine injury. Any cervical spine that do have spinous processes that have a step-off or maybe there's a distance between the spinous process might be significantly greater between two vertebrae versus another two vertebrae. If you have any index of suspicion, these are times where you might say, okay, maybe we should get an x-ray. Maybe we should get some kind of imaging. You're going to laterally palpate the muscles on the posterior neck. You're going to palpate the suboccipital area in order if there's any tenderness, somatic dysfunction. Greater occipital nerve may be tender and patient with chronic headache. A lot of patients come in and have headaches, right, and maybe that headache goes into the neck, maybe it's the neck pain that goes into the, turns into the headache. Now you want to find out on your osteopathic exam what the, where the pain is coming from. All right, so after palpation, now we're going to ask the patient to move, right. So we're going to go through range of motion, right. So we're going to go through flexing, right? So neck flexing, right? If you ever tell a patient to flex their neck, right, chances are if they're not in the medical field, they're not going to know exactly what you're talking about. So it's good to do two things, right? It's good to say it out loud in layman terminology, right? So layman terminology is terminology where somebody that's in the non-medical field will know exactly what you're talking about. So you could say bring your chin down to your chest. Versus extension, you're going to look up at the ceiling. Rotation, look over one side, one shoulder, and then the other. And then lateral bending. That's the way the textbooks say, but all the textbooks would say side bending. Either way is fine, side bending, lateral bending. Either way, it's interchangeable. You're going to have the patient to bring your ear to your shoulder. And keep an eye on how they do everything symmetric too. So it's not the fact that they can bring their ear to their shoulder, right? Is it equal on both sides or are they actually lifting their right shoulder up to make it easier for them to do it? Meaning that they probably have some kind of restriction rotating side bending rather to the right. So most of cervical flexion and extension is done by the OA joint. Most of cervical rotation is done by the AA joint. So some of the textbooks will say 50% of flexion extension is OA, and the other 50% is going to be all the other cervical vertebrae. 50 % of the cervical rotation comes from the AA, and the other 50% is going to come from all the other vertebrae in the cervical spine. And then lateral bending is mostly through C2 to C7. So active range of motion, right? So active range of motion, instruct the patient. You're going to tell them, right? And you can demonstrate, right? You'll be in front of them. I always stand in front of the patient and I do it with them as they do it, but I'm also looking at them as they do it as well. Extensions, again, same thing, look up at the ceiling, bring your chin down to your chest, and rotation, look over one shoulder versus lateral bending, bring your ears to your shoulder, right? But again, make sure they're not lifting up their shoulder to help themselves up, right? So a lot of my DPR lectures are going to have videos, right? So I ask the patient to rotate their head left and right, right? Now I'm going to ask the patient to bring her chin down to her chest, and I'm going to ask the patient to look at the ceiling, and I'm going to ask the patient to bring her ear to one shoulder and then bring another ear to the left shoulder and again as he's doing it you're looking for symmetric you're looking for symmetry right left right up down right um and you also want to look at the ease of the motion as well and sometimes if they're in pain you can see them kind of grinning in pain and that's all stuff that should give you a clue that where the restriction is going to be uh so we have more videos like that coming up right so i think especially with the special testing, it's going to make things a little bit easier, I think, right, this way it's not just all words on the slide. Normal range of version, right, there's a lot of different textbooks that have a lot of different references, right, so don't get too caught up on it, right, but it should be within a certain range, right, so flexion, right, to be able to look down 60 to 90 degrees, extension 70 to 90, right, side bending should go about 20 to 45, and rotation is going to go about 70 to 90 degrees. As you want to note, if there's any limited range of motion, right, maybe they have limited ROM range of motion, right, and that could be a number of reasons that could be causing it, whether it's stiffness, they feel very stiff, maybe it's arthritis, maybe they're in significant pain from trauma, maybe it's an overuse injury, or maybe they have a muscle spasm, right, kind of that picture that I had of me before, right, that was from a muscle spasm from a sort of callus. So typically resistance range of motion, right, now you're going to perform an isometric contraction, right, so basically you're going to have the patient try to move against resistance, right, so the muscle is going to contract, but it's not really going to make any changes in length, right, so it's going to be painful, weak, or it could be both, limited range of motion, right, whether they're stiffness, pain, overuse, muscle spasm, right, so these are all stuff you want to document, right, so after you resist this range of motion, we go through the neurovascular exam, muscle strength, right, sensation, deep tendon reflex, right, because we talk about the reticular type of pain, right, so we talk about compression on the nerve root, right? And when we talk about compression on the nerve root, right, um, we have this chart that I just, I had maybe like three or four lectures ago, right? So remember we did this, um, C5, uh, C6, C7, right? So, um, in case I did anybody misinterpreted when I talked about the New York, uh, you're driving in New York on a highway and, um, and somebody cut you off and you cut somebody else off right um so we don't we don't so i say that new yorkers right they may give you the finger right and that'll be your c7 and then as they're giving you the finger right they're giving this you out the window right so when they give you the uh the middle finger out the window in order to do that they are going to have to extend their elbow right they're going to have to extend their elbow and they're going to have to flex their wrist all right so when i mentioned that in the last lecture we don't do that but But there are other people in New York, and if you cut them off, then don't be bothered by it. Just keep going and try not to do it again. So that's C7, and that is your tricep reflex. So C6, C5, and just know that they're all related to sensory, motor, and reflex. But by now, you probably all have this memorized because it's very important to know. Cervical spine examination, limits sign. So this is also known as barber's chair phenomenon, so basically the patient is going to be sitting down on the table and they're going to attempt to actively hold their head upright. The patient is going to feel an electric shock sensation that goes down the spine, arm or the leg. So again, the patient is going to attempt to actively hold their head upright, and that's going to create a shock sensation, this is all indicated potentially for spinal stenosis, but you still want to rule out other significant, more serious diagnosis, multiple chlorosis, ALS, or Arnold C.R.A. malformation. Axial compression test, so you're standing behind the patient, you're going to perform the test one time, because if you keep doing it, eventually it's going to hurt the patient. We don't want to hurt the patient, so we'll just do this one test, just make sure when you're doing it, you have it in the right position. All right, so Gabiner places both hands on top of the patient's head, and they're going to provoke a downward force with both hands, so both hands right here is going to be axial compression. It's going to be going down. So, axial compression is going to be significant for a cervical nerve impingement. Usually, they're going to have pain or neurological symptoms of the cervical spine and or upper extremity to reproduce. So, that's going to reproduce the pain. So, opposite of axial compression, we are going to have the foraminal distraction test. So, here he's put one hand underneath the patient's chin and the other hand is on the occiput. So here's the occiput, here is the chin, and he's going to be lifting, and that force going up, right? So this is positive, right, if when he's lifting up and the pain goes away or the pain is reduced, right? So again, a positive test, meaning the pain and or neurological symptoms of the cervical spine and or upper extremities are reduced, right? Are reduced, right? So that's a positive test if there's a reduction in the pain with traction, right? what that's doing is because that's going to alleviate the cervical nerve impingement. So again, that would be a positive test if the pain is reduced, if there's no change, then you could say that it's a negative test. One of the more common tests, very common, we see this a lot, Spirling test. Spirling is looking for a foraminal compression on the nerve root. So simply, what we are going to do, again, foraminal compressing on the nerve root, so what we're going to do, we're going to place one hand on top of the head, of the patient's head, and then on the other hand, he's going to be on the affected side, so if he's complaining of left-sided pain on the neck, so what he is going to do, he's going to side bend and rotate the neck towards the side of the pain, which is to the left side. He's going to add a little bit of extension, and then he's going to put a downward force. But just keep in mind that if he does this and sees in pain before he even gets to the downward force, you don't have to do the downward force, because if they're telling you they're in pain, you don't want to put them through any more pain than what they're experiencing. So if they have a pain radiating down into the arm when the head is rotated, so sometimes if you just rotate the head to the left and side bend to the left, if they already have the pain and it's radiating down into the arm, you can assume that they have a strepical radiculopathy. If they don't have the pain, then you can always add the extension. So here we are going to add the extension, and then the downward force compression, and that's going to be compression on the nerve root, and that's going to tell you that there is cervical radiculopathy. So some injuries, most common cervical injuries, a lot of this we already talked about, so I don't want to talk too much about it. It's just to know that the most common is going to be the cervical strain or the cervical sprain. So this is usually self -limiting, right, usually you have to give it time to heal, you have to give it time with rest, ice, anti-inflammatory, and a very gradual return to activity. OMM is very effective, right, reducing tendinitis, reducing pain, reducing muscle hypotonicity. Traumatic dysfunction is going to develop, right, you may get straightening of the cervical spine, right, we talked about that, straightening of the cervical spine, they may get some headaches, cephalosia, fingers, burners, right, that results from ipsilateral, meaning on the same side, compression or contralateral traction to your cervical plexus, and the pain is going to be a significant pain that travels down the nerve root. We talked about osteoarthritis, right, so a common condition where multiple joints in the vertebra bone component, right, they get classic changes, and so this is where we talked about like the osteophyte formation, right, bone calcification, right, that's going to lead to osteoarthritis, and then we have degenerative disc disease, right, remember we talked about DDD, you throw that on the other selector, right? Degenerative disc disease, wearing chair phenomenon that occurs when the, across the disc vertebrae interface, and basically it happens to us when we get older, right? Inherent loss of water, right? The disc becomes, it begins to degenerate. Some more urgent things to mention, right? Fractures, right? not good, not a good thing, cervical fracture. Moderate forces are at play, pain, and dysfunction are disproportionate to the physical finding. So they're yelling, they're 13 out of 10 pain, but the physical finding doesn't support it. You always want to make sure that you rule out any kind of fracture. Maybe they have a pinpoint tenderness, maybe they have neurological findings. So that's something we rule out. We want to make sure we stabilize the head. And herniated discs, right, we're talking about disherniation, infection, inflammatory condition, malignancy, right, myelopathy. Again, myelopathy is due to an injury to the spinal cord and not the nerve root, right? Nerve root is radiculopathy, spinal cord compression is myelopathy, right? And these are the patients that's going to present with ataxia, bowel, bladder, incontinence, right? Shadow anesthesia. Not chattel anesthesia, but bowel, bladder, incontinence, ataxia. Significant upper nerve, upper neuron finding, they're going to have the hypereflexia. So thoracic outlet syndrome, and more vascular emergency that needs to be ruled out. So we use our NEXUS criteria. right, so NEXIS criteria is a criteria that we use to determine whether the cervical spine needs imaging or if you can avoid imaging in the appropriate patient, right. So it's a very well validated clinical decision aid, right. So when you are on the football field or you're in the ring and somebody has an injury to the head, right, you want to be able to safely rule out a cervical spine injury. So if you can't rule out a cervical spine injury, you have to assume that they have a neck injury. So the five criteria that we're going to talk about, if none of them are present, right, the C-spine can be cleared clinically, right? So they have to have no neurological deficit, no spinal tenderness, right, no ulcerative mental status, no intoxication, right, they can't be altered mental status, and they can't have any distraction or painful injury. If they don't have any of these five criteria, then you can rule out a suit spine, and you don't have to worry about imaging, you can monitor. But if they have any one of these, that's going to change the whole game plan. So if they have any of these, neurological deficits, they have fine tenderness, altered mental status, right, they're unconscious, right, intoxicated, they have, when we talk about distracting pain injuries, not that you get distracted by another injury, maybe they have a cut on their forehead or whatever it might be, but we're talking about a significant painful injury, right, we're talking about a broken femur, right, a broken femur is going to distract the patient from their neck pain, right, because they have so much pain in their femur. so um when a fighter get hit they get knocked in the head right and now they uh they're unconscious but the fighter keeps punching them in the head they take another couple more blows and they land on the ground they're unconscious and their head is bouncing off the ground a couple of times and if i go in there and the guy and the fighter is not awake right and he's also his mental status or he has positive loss of consciousness right i also assume that he has the next injury so what I'll do is I'll wait for the EMS, right, and they're going to come over, they're going to put a collar on him, they're going to put him on a backboard, and they are going to take him out by ambulance, right, if he's unconscious, right, but we have to assume that he has a neck injury, and that's next to his criteria. But if he begins to wake up, now I'm going to put my, I'm going to, I'm going to have him still laying down, I'm going to palpate, palpate the neck, I want to make sure there's no spine tenderness, right, and I'm going to ask him, are you having any pain, I'm going an active event, any neurological symptoms, right, because I want to make sure I can safely rule out any kind of spine injury before I help him get back up, right, so, um, so again, right, you want to just palpate the spine, right, maybe you can have him move their heads to the side, left and right, and that's part of the neck trachea we're going to talk about, right, so the Canadian C-spine, right, this is a little bit more, um, more advanced, not advanced but this is a little bit more um a little more complicated i guess uh than the nexus criteria. The nexus criteria they just give you the fine thing if they have any one of them then you put a call on them and you and you probably have to and you get imaging if you're not in the hospital you have to transfer over to the hospital right when we talk about the canadian c-spine this is used in the alert and stable trauma patients where the c-spine might be a concern right and And what this does is they kind of have risk factors, right? So some of the risk factors that they may have is that they're over the age of 65, right? They're over the age of 65, right? Maybe they have some kind of dangerous mechanism or they have any numbness in their extremities. And all these are going to be high risk factors where you're going to want to get imaging done. If the patient doesn't have any risk factors and they have low risk factors, right? So if they have any low-risk factors, maybe they fall from a sitting position, maybe they're in like a low-velocity motor vehicle accident, MVA. If they have any low-risk factors, then you would want to have the patient be able to rotate their head 45 degrees to the right and 45 degrees to the left. This is tough to memorize the whole thing, so I wouldn't expect you all to memorize the whole thing. But this is something that you'll see in the ER, they have this, if they do go by the Canadian C-spine rule, they're going to have this up in the ER, you'll be able to look at it. And the more you look at it, the more it's going to become, you're going to know exactly what you're looking for in the criteria. So we get to the thoracic spine, now we do cervical, now we're going to get back to thoracic spine. We're going to talk about inspection. You're going to, just like every other exam, you begin looking at the patient, right? And just to make it not so awkward when you're looking, right, there's nothing wrong saying I am looking at your back. I'm looking for any muscle abnormality. I'm looking for any obvious signs of deformity, muscle imbalance, any bone abnormality, right? I'm looking at the skin condition. I'm looking for symmetry or asymmetry. I'm looking at the curvature, right? there's nothing wrong saying it out loud this way the patient knows exactly what you're saying, what you're doing, and it's going to help you when you document. If you say there's no other thema, there's no echemosis, now when you go to write your note, it makes it so much easier because you said it out loud, right, you know you can document because you actually were looking for those findings. Palpation, right, on skin, right, thoracic, lumbar junction, right, usually there's some kind of, there can be a significant finding. You want to palpate the thoracic and the lumbar spine, palpate the paraspinal, palpate the spinal trusses, work your way down. You're going to be using your thumb as you're going down. Evaluate with the skin drag test and the erythema test, very important test. We went over this pretty detailed in OMM lab, but you do a skin drag test. It's going to tell you a lot of information about the condition, whether it's chronic, whether it's acute, whether it's something going on on the right side, left side, and what area of the spine is going on. Again, we talk about range of motion, right? Range of motion, right? Not only can they do the range of motion, right? But do they have any pain or tenderness with these range of motions, right? Especially if they have any kind of pain that radiates into the legs, right? This is going to warrant a neurological testing later on. So you want to make sure you keep an eye at that pain radiating into the legs and you're going to want to keep an eye and then maybe do a full neurological test of the lower extremity. So we're going to start with flexing. So flexing, you can easily say to the patient, bend forward and try to touch your toes. Note the symmetry of the movement. Are they having any pain? The patient's going to flexing over here. So when the patient is going to flexion. This is going to be, you're going to be able to check out the psoas muscles, you're going to the hip flexors, so you have the psoas muscles. And then you're going to go into neck, not neck, but you're going to go into back extensions. So you're going to have the patient bend backwards. So you're going to have the patient bend back as far as possible, and you're going to place your hand on the PSIS with the fingers pointing towards the midline. This is all going to be on the DPR handout. And then the next is going to be rotations. This is all active. Have the patient actively rotate. Have the patient, you can tell them rotate from side to side. And then you're going to have the patient lateral bending, side bending. You're going to have the patient bend to the side of the waist. Any decrease in spinal mobility. We talked about some of the diagnosis earlier. We talked about OA, we talked about ankylosing spondylitis, right, these are all stuff to keep in mind as potential differential, um, range of motion, flexion, right, very easily done, right, have the patient bend down as far as they can go, try to touch the ground if they can, right, and then they're going to come back up, and you're going to ask them, do you have any pain while you went down, um, and then next is going to be extension, right, so again, extension, right? Very, very important to do extension because you're going to put more pressure on the posterior aspect of the spine. And we talked about some differential diagnosis where they may have more pain on extension, right? Just as spondylolysis, right? Now they're putting more pressure on the part intra-articularis when they're leaning back. Next is going to be rotation, right? So, this is passively, you're going to put one hand on the hip, one hand on top of the shoulder, and you're going to rotate them from one side to the next. And then our side bending is going to be active. So active side bending. We talked about, again, if they have neck pain or they have back pain, then you need to do the neurological testing. So remember what we said about L4? L4, right, kick the door, right, so L4, kick the door, there's nothing for L5, and then S1 is the Achilles tendon, right, muscle strength, right, so you're going to have ankle dorsiflexion at L4, right, great show, dorsiflexion at L5, and plantar flexion at S1, and then the sensory, medial, L4, dorsal, L5, lateral, S1, we're gonna do some of the tasks we're gonna go through, alright, so some of them are pretty very very straightforward, right, so it's good to know if you have any, if you have any suspicion for certain diagnosis, right, these are all tasks that you can easily do that's going to help you out, right, the first task is the at a scapular elevation, right? So basically you're going to ask the patient to lift up, right? If, let's say for example, she does have pain or weakness on this left side, right? Then next thing you can do is maybe you can say to the patient, can you side bend or can you lateral bend your head to your left shoulder, right? You're going to ask her to lateral bend and if there's weakness there, right, then you can also consider the fact that maybe it's not just a muscle injury, but maybe it's more of a nerve injury. And what nerve did we talk about where they may have a nerve injury, that could be cranial nerve number 11, right, the spinal accessory nerve, because you're testing for the trapezius when you're lifting up, right, you're testing the SCM as your side bending to the side. Endonitis, again, trapezius, or the levator scapulae, or you might have cranial nerve damage at the spinal accessory, right, so again, arm dressing on the side, have the patient shrug their shoulders up again to resist them, and they're going to have pain or weakness. Winging of the scapula, right, winging of the scapula, the patient pushes against the wall with both hands, with their feet farther away from the walls and the shoulders, right, and you're going to note that there's scapular winging, right, or weakness during the maneuver, right, very, very commonly tested, right, all over. You can express, say, serratus anterior weakness, right, but there's also other muscles that can also generate winging from the scapula, right, keep in mind lateral winging can also be caused by trapezius and rhomboid paralysis or weakness. So again, scapular winging, protracting, right, you can see the It's asymmetric on one side versus the other. The next test we're going to talk about is abstin test. So abstin, the patient is going to palpate the radio pulse. So that radio pulse is right there. The patient is going to rotate their head toward the test's arm. So she's going to rotate her head to the left, and she's going to tilt her head backwards. So her head is going to go backwards, and she's going to rotate to the left. And the examiner is going to abduct and extend the arm. So he's abducting the arm, bringing the arm away and bringing it into extension. The patient has to inhale and turn the head toward the affected side. So she's going to inhale, turn her head, and that radial pulse is going to diminish. That's going to diminish, and that could be indicative of thoracic outlet syndrome, usually related to the scalen musculature. So we talked about the impingements of the artery, the subclavian artery in particular, but there could be other causes of a somatic outlet syndrome that we need to consider. We're going to ask and test. Then we also have some other related to the scalene. It could be related to the rib. We're going to go over atom testing. right? Atom testing is a test to screen for scoliosis. So the patient is standing, they're going to have their patient bend forward and you're looking at the side from one, from one side of the rib cage to the other side, right? So you're going to, if there's the presence of a unilateral rib cage or rib hump, then it's going to mean that they probably have some kind of scoliosis. So let's say that the scoliosis is like this. So the concavity is on the left side. What you're going to notice is that the rib hump is to the right because the vertebra is rotating to the right. Just be careful, a lot of test questions like to say the spinous process is going to be going to the left. So when we have the spinous process, So when we have that spinous process, when that's going to the left, we can say that whatever vertebra that is, that's going to be rotating to the right. So the spinous process is moving to the left, and the vertebra is rotating to the right. So the spinous process is going towards the concavity, and the vertebrae is going to be curving to the right side, and that's why you get that little hump right there. Test, ****** test, very simple. One leg up, maybe not simple for everybody, but if they can't tolerate the test, you don't have to do the test, right? But if they can, right, you can have the patient stand on one leg, lift up the other leg, right? And that's going to create a hyperextension, right? Hyperextension, right? Positive test is going to be indicated by pain in the lower back. This stresses out the posterior elements of the spine, right? Posterior elements of the spine. And that could be indicated of what we mentioned before, is you're putting more pressure on the pars interarticularis, right? If there's a stress fracture or if there's a fracture or if there's any pathology, right? We worry about, we worry about fondolelysis. The straight leg test, right? Another test done in OMM lab, right? but we're going to review over this again because it's very important, very commonly used, right? Patients do pines. They relax their legs. We do the work. We're going to lift the leg with the knee extended, raised off the table, right? The bilateral exam, we do the side that's not hurting first. If they have a radicular pain coming from the back and it goes through the sciatic nerve distribution and it goes below the knee, we worry about nerve root impingement. So again, straight leg test, usually, so yeah, they're going to have a reproducible pain that's going down the posterior aspect of the leg, usually it's about maybe 30, 40, 50 60 70 degrees 70 degrees um so 30 to 70 degrees um further support um straight leg test is um brogaard test all right so brogaard is very very similar bring the leg up whoop that causes pain and that causes pain again all right so So you're going to bring the patient up, dorsiflexion of the foot, L5 portion of the scatastic nerves will be stressing leading to pain. Again, that's going to be indicated of nerve root impingement, pain that radiates below the knee. Wells opposite straight leg raising, right, so patient raises, so there's active patients who are doing the work, and they're going to raise their straight leg on the uninvolved side. It's provocative if pain is experienced on the side opposite that being tested or raised rather. The test is positive for a possible face occupying lesion if the pain occurs on the opposite side. So it's raised if the uninvolved leg and pain on the opposite side is developing. Hoover's test, again, Hoover's test is a test for potential for maliggering or a patient possibly trying to, not giving enough effort into the exam, maybe they have other goals, so they're seeking secondary gain potentially again this is just one test you don't just out of many right you don't just do the one test and just say that the patient is malignant right um you have to take everything else that goes into the um into the history taking the whole physical exam right but this one test is just one test out of many that you're going to be doing and basically what happened is if they're really trying you're going to act the patient let's say it's the left leg that is injured, you're going to ask the pacing to lift the left leg off the table. If they're lifting and they're trying as hard as they can, they're going to create a reciprocal force that is going down on this left foot, this left ankle. So if they're trying to get this leg up and they're really trying, what's going to happen is they're going to really push down on this side. So you're going to feel pressure going down and that's usually a negative finding because we know that they're really trying, they're giving a good effort by trying to bring that leg up. If they say, doc, I can't get my left leg up and they're making no motion over here, right, there's no contralateral force going down, then that's the potential that it could be a positive test. Again, one test out of many in the whole history, right, so you don't want to say 100 % the patient's malignant, but it's something to keep in the back of your mind. uh some differential diagnosis and i'm not going to go through them all because we went through them already uh lumbar strain lumbar strain right a herniated disc right final stenosis right you're going to have a diculopathy pain uh final stenosis uh you're going to have spondylolysis spondylolysis spondylolysis right try saying that three times over and over again and we're going to have compression fracture. More serious etiology, quarter esquina syndrome, again, this is stuff that we don't want to miss. So they have bowel or bladder incontinence, they have urinary retention, they have progressive motor or sensory loss, you do an exam, they have saddle anesthesia, weakness, major motor weakness, right, something to consider, cauda squina, cancer, right, again, we don't want to miss it, so they have unexplained weight loss, they have other history of cancer, right, they have vertebral tenderness, again, fracture can also be vertebral tenderness, right, they could have significant trauma that's related to the AIDS, right, so they could be involved in a high velocity car accident, maybe they have a history of osteoporosis, maybe they have a history of steroid use. And then infection. Severe pain, maybe they had lumbar spine surgery in the past and now they're having potential for infection and maybe they have a history of IV drug use. And maybe they have fever on their history taken, they have fever. Or they have other kinds of infection going on. This is stuff where we don't want to miss these etiologists. So we are doing good on time. We're almost done. I just got a quick case because with the DPR lab, we want to give a case. So a patient comes in, a 77 -year-old, and their chief complaint is back pain. So the patient came in. This is a real patient. See, it's a real case. Very, very real case. And it's one of many, many cases that we see using the osteopathic manipulative medicine, right, OMM, OMT, right. If you're a third year, just make sure, and you're virtuating with me at the clinic, right, I always ask the third year right in front of the patient. Well, I usually ask the patient, I'm like, do you have any further questions about what OMM is, right, and then if they say yes, then I always direct it right to the third year medical student so make sure you have a good definition in your head That's exactly how you're going to explain it to a person that might not be familiar with OMM. But that's a side note, going back to the case, 77-year-old male coming to the clinic for chronic upper and lower back pain, pain going on for about 10 years, he has a history of Parkinson's, and I act the patient and point to the pain, and he points to the lower back on both sides, and he said the pain is about a 3 -4 on a pain scale, it's a dull, achy pain and there's no radiation to the pain so I hit my OPQRT. Pain is worse when he prolongs standing and walking and it gets better when he's resting. The work up so far is that he's done multiple ortho evaluations. He had epidurals in the past. He has physical therapy. I want to know what have you done before. I want to know what kind of imaging you've done before. He had a lumbar, sacral, spine x-rays, or moderate degenerative disc narrowing, and small central disc, so he had an MRI rather, disc herniations, and mostly in the lower lumbar reasons. So MRI shows that there's some self-degenerative disc disease and small central disc herniations. So review system, no weight loss or weight gain. He does have difficult sleeping, the pain kind of keeps him up at night, head, eye, There's no throat, right, no throat pain, changes in vision. Cardio, there's no chest pain, palpapation, pulmonary, no shortness of breath, no cough, GI, no belly pain, no ulcer, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, neurology, no headache, numbness, or tingling, right. There's no urinary, there's no bowel or bladder incontinence, there's no shadow anesthesia. Again, review your system, right, you want to make sure that it's something to bring up. And then we go through allergies, right. So every one of your ****** notes should have something similar to this, right? So allergies, if they say they have an allergy to penicillin, your very next question should be what kind of reaction do you get? Medications, when I'm listing medications, they're dosing, and how often they're taking it, right? And if they're taking a PRN, Claritin is taking PRNs, right? They're taking it for allergies, right? And Lodipine is taking it for blood pressure, right? So their past medical history should have blood pressure, right? and it should have Parkinson's. Surgical history, appendectomy. Family history, I just did the mother and father, but in the DPR lab, make sure you get... I usually get all the... You want to get out of your three generations. You want to get the parents, the siblings, and if they have any kids, any differential diagnosis. Are they deceased or are they alive? Very important to document. Social history, retired accountant. limited exercise, secondary to pain, and healthcare maintenance, one with the last colonoscopy, and vaccinations, and any other healthcare screening. Physical exam, vital signs, as listed, general, head, extremities, neurological, basically he had a normal mental status with hypophonic and tachypneic. So normal mental status, he was speaking with hypophonic and tachypneic. So motor strength is limited by increased tone bilateral, and he had pronounced camptoformia. So what is camptoformia? And also, how is he walking, right? Is he walking with a walker, right? Is he walking with a cane, right? Is he ambulatory in pain, right? Is he limping, right? He also has walking with a camptoacormia. So what is camptoacormia? So this is what a camptoacormia is. It's a severe significant flexion of the spine and usually this can also be referred to as bent spine syndrome, BSS, right? Where the patient appears in a standing position, right, and they have significant abnormal flexion of the trunk. All right, so physical exam, again, musculoskeletal, thoracic spine, head forward and rounded shoulder posture. There's no vertebral spine tenderness, no muscle spasm present bilaterally, right, there's an increased thoracolumbar spine flexion, right, range of motion extremely limited in all directions. So, he came in to try some OMM and on the osteopathic structural exam, you always want to begin at the different body parts when you're diagnosing and when you're treating and when you're documenting. So we started off at the cranial, so he has subaccipital hypotonicity, we talked about the OA and how he treated it. Every documentation you do for OMM, you always have to have a diagnosis. You have to have the severity, you have to have the treatment that you did, and you have to have the response. Because later on, when you all learn how to build, you're going to learn how to build based on how many body parts that you're treating, right? So we talked about the cranial cervical, so again, cervical, right, definitely the hypotonicity of the upper trap. We talked about C4, we were able to localize, severity was pretty severe, right, we did some FPR, mild fascia release, and some thoracic, right, we treated the lumbar, right, the lumbar, some muscle spasm, activated the L1-L3, right, some muscle spasm in the thoracic spine as well, right, so we talked about the treatment, and the upper extremity, fascial restriction in the bilateral shoulders, right, so modify Spencer's technique because, again, he was 78. He had difficulty rotating onto the side, so we figured we could try it with him in the supine position, right, and I would try to do some of our direct small fascial release. So on the assessment, right, when I wrote my note and I wrote my assessment, right, so he had back pain, but that's, we're in the medical field. That's not enough. right, we have to say why does he have back pain, right, that's our job is to figure out why and any treatment that might be, that might help, right, so multi-bacterial, right, so there's a lot of things that's causing his back pain, whether it's the degenerative disc disease, the herniated disc, the spondylosis, the arthritis changes, multiple somatic dysfunction, right, he has the history of Parkinson's disease, he has the canphyromia, right, that could be related to the Parkinson's disease probably is, and that whole thing is out of the assessment and then we come up with a plan, right? So you all are just learning how to write the plan now, right? So you want to say, what did you do for the patient in the office and what is the plan and when are they going to follow up, right? You always want to make sure when the patient is following up, when you need to see them again and maybe you're not doing something now, but you might do something in the future, right? In that case, you consider getting imaging if the pain doesn't get better, if the pain gets worse and i write this in here because if i don't see the patient next time because maybe i'm not there and somebody else see the patient they look at my note and they know exactly what was in my thought process so we talked about omam hydration eating healthy applying heat right especially for the chronic pain right the acute pain i like to use ice right anti-inflammatory back exercises range of motion physical therapy right work on balance and tylenol motrin as needed for the pain. The patient on the second visit followed up feeling better and one thing he did notice that was pretty significant he was able to fully lift his back to an upright position which is something that he hasn't been able to do for a very very very long time and so within the second visit he was pretty happy and then on a third visit he went from being happy to being very happy with the treatment. He was able to stand outside for the first time and be able to stand tall, things that we'll take and be able to look at the sky, right? Because when you're in Camp Del Cormier, right, you're just looking down the entire time, right? So he was able to do something that we all take for granted, right? He was able to go outside, be able to lift his back up, be able to look up into the sky, and that was something that he was not able to do prior, right? So definitely a significant improvement. So to summarize, right, I know I went maybe a couple minutes over. I do apologize again, but I put a lot of videos in there, I hope the video helps you all out. We do have, I do have one more lecture for you coming up, right, and that's going to be the another, actually I have two more great lectures, actually the next lecture is going to be really, really good, because that is, I can't tell you what it is, you're going to have to find out by watching the next lectures, right, and something definitely you should be looking forward to, and I do use two of the past medical students to help me out one of them is now in a urology residency and I'm giving way too much information so I'll let you I'll let you look forward to that next DPR lecture but the summary slide now and then there's one more lecture so I have two more lectures for you all coming up so the summary slide history taken physical exam. We talked about the subjective, objective, normal, abnormal, how to document normal versus abnormal finding. We talked a lot about special testing. And special testing, very important to know, and incorporating of OMM in the case study. So these are the references. A lot of them are on the slide. Definitely leave feedback. Let me know if you have any questions, comments, concerns, Do you have any suggestions for me to make the lectures better? I always want to try to make the lectures better because I know as a medical student, you guys are getting so many lectures, so I try to make it a little bit of entertaining. It may go a few minutes late, but I hope that you can all look forward to what you have coming up, a lot of great stuff coming up with second year, third year, being on clinical rotation, master's, graduation, all going to be here within three years. So thank you all for watching, if you have any questions please let me know, otherwise have a great day.