Good afternoon. Today we're going to talk about the musculoskeletal system and the imaging of the musculoskeletal system. Here are the objectives. This, I don't think you need to be a radiologist to realize that this is abnormal. The hip should not live outside the body. It should be over here at the glenoid and the acetabular fossa, same as the other side. And that there's a proximal femoral fracture over here. This is an example of an open fracture, which we'll talk about later on. So the most important thing is having a systematic approach. One, we want to identify the body part. That's probably the most important thing. There should be a minimum of two views, a frontal and nonal view. So two views are orthogonal to each other. Most joints will have an oblique view related to as well. We also want to know if the patient's an adult or child because your differential change based on the age of the patient. So if I see a lesion in the patient that's a pediatric patient, my first differential is not metastatic disease. It would be more of a primary bone tumor. So anything in red is very important to know on these power points, something you may see in life that you should do in real life, as well as see in exams. So one, we're going to check the alignment. Two, we're going to evaluate for joint spaces. Then we're going to evaluate the bone cortex. And then lastly, we're going to evaluate the soft tissue structures. This is just describing the different x-ray densities from darkest to lightest, with darkest being air and the lightest being metal, such as this person with the AICD and the darkest being the gas in the lungs. So joint alignment, loss of alignment may be due to a fracture or dislocation. So what we're going to do is we're going to trace each of these bones and make sure that they align. And then we can see when we get to the third metatarsal, the metatarsal filial angel joint, they are not aligned. So this is an example of a dislocation. So these all align, but this one does not. You may say, well, this looks a little crooked to me. Well, that is true because they have a bunion deformity. or how's valgus deforming and this little bones over here are called sesamoid bones which you'll see on x-rays they occur where tendons tendons curve so the patella is technically a sesamoid so once again something in red very important to know here's your humeral head is located anterior to the glenoid so this is anterior glenohumeral dislocation this is the normal appearance of the humeral head articulates with the glenoid here's a wide view or a lateral view looking at that same thing. So here's the glenoid, here's your coracoid process, here's your hermoral head. So this is anterior glenohemal dislocation. This is what it normally should look like. It should normally sit in the glenoid fossa. Then we talk about the joint spaces. Are they narrowed, which may be due to cartilage loss, or they'd be widened or destroyed due to a dislocation or dissociation. So when we're looking, we can look at all the other joints. We can see that there's a nice space between them. But when we get to the first maritossal, we can see that there's a mark loss of space to it, and they develop some buttressing osteophytes. So this is arthritis of that first myrtosal phalangeal joint. Next, very important that I have all the residents do is trace the cortices. You want to trace every single cortex to the bone. Each of this white line is the cortex, and it should be traced entirely on every single bone that you're looking at. You can see here, when we come across tracing the cortex, there is a gap in that cortex. so this is an example of a fracture well you have to make sure you trace every single bone for any breaches of the cortex which indicate a fracture because often fractures occur multiple so you want to make sure that there is not multiple fractures you're missing just because you saw one this is an important finding to know this is not a fracture this is a nutriophoramina occurs in the long bones the femur and the humerus at the level of mid -diathesis it's normal. It's a normal variant. I'll just call it a neutropharma, not to be mistaken for a fracture. One of the things we're gonna look at is the soft tissues. So when we're looking at the soft tissues, we can look for is there joint infusion or not, or is there a soft tissue spawning. So those are the things that you want to look at. So this here, here's your patella. Over here, here is Here's your distal femur, here's your tibia and fibula, here's your patellar, tibia and quadraten. This over here is a joint infusion, it's your supatella bursa. So, the joint infusions may indicate that there's pathology in the joint that we may not normally see. So what happens is, on this view here, this joint infusion is what we call a lipoenium arthrosis. They have fat and fluid in the joint. And the reason why is because they have a fracture of the proximal tibia. and this fracture goes to the level of the joint the fat is known there's normal marrow in the bone normal bone marrow has fat so anytime you have a breach of the cortex that fat can link out to the joint and you get a fat fluid level or lymphoma arthrosis so you think of oil and water on a lateral view the oil is gonna float on top of the water so that causes that fat fluid level this is a very important picture to know how going forward you're looking at this so what's the principle of viewing joints or extremities you need at least two views and don't get satisfaction in search you need at least two views because you may miss something they need to be 90 degrees for each other so here's an example here's a frontal view of the ankle tibia fibula talus so two views if i told you there's a fractionist view you may tell me where but when i showed you the orthogonal view this fraction of the fibula is very obvious now Not here, it was right here before, but now it's very obvious because there's two views. The reason why that happens is because X-rays were coming in and were directly in line with the level, the path of the fracture itself. So you need two views, many of them are orthogonal to each other. Same thing applies in this case. So I told you there's a dislocation of the wrist, you may be like, well, where do I see the dislocation? I'm not exactly sure. And then when we look at the lateral view, we can see that the lunate is dislocated boldly. So this is a lunatic dislocation. Easier to see on the loud view than the frontal view. And you can always compare sides. So here's the normal left femur. This is the abnormal femur on this side. So we can see that there's loosens in the femur over here. So this is a femoral fracture. So it's always nice to compare sides. And then don't get satisfaction searched. Don't get satisfied with what you find initially. Make sure you evaluate every single bone structure. and soft tissue structure. So your eyes are probably drawn to this big calcification pose, which is an incidental calcified fibroid or Lyme armous uterus with degeneration calcification. But you may have missed that there is a femoral fracture on this side with this lucency. Here's the normal femoral neck, lucency in this femoral neck. Don't get distracted by the fibroid. As a radiologist, we're responsible for everything in the film, so we will trace all these cortices. We'll look at all the joints and the bones, but also we're responsible for the lungs. So in this person has nice dark lungs over here. This person has a having radiculopathy type symptoms on their arm. Turns out they have a large Panko's tumor, which is causing those symptoms. So we are evaluate for everything. So always evaluate the whole film and don't get satisfied research. It's also hard to see what's not there. This person had a resection of a bone, well you may have to repeat that mnemonic for the carpal bones in your head, but the trapezium was resected over here because the trapezium articulates with the thumb, and what they did was they put a hardware in there. Here's a end plate, a plate, and they put a tension wire between the two of them because they resected this bone, but it may be hard to see that the bone is resected if you don't know it's there. Same thing here. We don't see the superior superior ***** ramus on this side, we see a little bit on this side, but it's always hard to see what's not there. This happens to be a superior ***** ramus lesion that's being averted by a large tumor that averted it. Next, we're going to talk about fracture descriptions. There are different fracture descriptions, and I'm not going to hold you to any of those on exams, but you should know about them in real life. The transverse, are they bleak, spiral, longitudinal? Are the fractures displaced or angulated? Are there multiple fracture fragments, and do they involve the articular surface? A couple of things to note. We spoke about open fractures really briefly in the beginning. An open fracture is when it's exposed to air. So the bone either violated the soft tissues, or the laceration in the soft tissues violated down to the bone. So those are the ones that are surgical emergencies that need to be washed out because you get an increased risk of infection. And then there's pathologic fractures. There's two different types of pathologic fracture. Pathologic fracture can be caused of normal stress on the abnormal bone. Is there a bone tumor underneath it or the patient's osteopenic? Or a pathologic fracture could have abnormal stress on the normal bone, such as your stress fractures. Your runners will get that. So abnormal stress on the normal bone is a stress fracture. pathologic fracture is normal stress and abnormal bone. This is just the schematic of the different type of fractures you may see when you're in your clinical practice. This is an important fracture to know in kids. You're going to see this in the important know for example. This is the example of a green fracture. We have fracture on one side of the bone and just sort of buckling and bending on the other side of the bone over here. Here's an example of stress fracture so patient was having pain pain they're walking constantly have pain they come in radiographs but this is initially when they saw the doctor the doctor had then come back and they developed after they were still having pain with their walking about 14 days later and we can see over here that this fluffy stuff next to the bone over here this is what peri -austral reaction looks like and the reason why you get developed peri -austral reaction which happens about 7 to 14 days after the insult, is because the bone is trying to heal itself from the outside in, so it develops this periocity of new bone. And this is what you're going to see. So this is an example of a stress fracture. It actually is called the marsh fracture, which you see in soldiers. You will see these changes in MRI first. So if someone comes with foot pain, you're worried about stress fracture, you do an MRI, you're going to see before the periocity of new bone develops, you're going to see that the bone marrow edema in there, because the bone is swollen and inflamed. So you're going to see that in the MRI. We're going to talk very briefly about bone tumors, and I'll highlight what things I think you should know. So when something has a geographic appearance, it has a well-defined appearance to it, these are typically benign or slow-growing, where you can trace a pencil around it. So I can outline this with the pencil. So that is a benign, slow-growing tumor. it has a sclerotic rim because the bone has a chance to remodel around it. So it has about a 95% chance of being benign when you see something like this. More aggressive type lesions, which grow more rapidly, you will not see that cortical rim and you know may have a smoother margin to it, you will not see that cortical rim. And this is more of an aggressive lesion here where we cannot trace our pencil around it. It's infiltrated all the way throughout. So these are what more aggressive lesions. You won't be able to trace your pencil around it. So denying lesions, I can trace and outline the lesion completely with a pencil going around it. A very aggressive lesion, which you will see with malignant neoplasms. So this is an example of a malignant neoplasm. An osteomyelitis has this moth-y appearance to it. And there's a very permanent pattern, so it's something you need to know. Permanent pattern again. Different types of peri-oxygen, you can have benign peri -oxygen, aggressive or very aggressive peri -oxygen reaction. It's very aggressive, so it indicates that there is a benign, has a more solid appearance. As we get aggressive, it has more of a laminated and speculated appearance, and then the very aggressive has this clavent triangle. And because the bone can't heal itself quick enough as it lays down the bone, that's what has more of an aggressive appearance, as those lesions which grow very quickly, or infection which happens very quickly. So slow growing, thick periostal reaction, slow growing, benign. Once again, solid periostal reaction. This is that more laminated appearance, what we call onion skin appearance to it. It's because the bone cannot produce enough periostal movement fast enough, so it can't heal fast enough, so you get this laminated appearance to it. And the cognitive triangle is the same thing, where you have these eye growth of monocropies fibers, which are more aggressive, sometimes type lesion, a very aggressive lesion. And then lastly, we'll talk about cosmos triangle, which is the most aggressive, where it forms a certain angle with the periosteum, it forms an angle because of the tumor that's happening underneath it. So you have this triangular type formation to it. A very aggressive periostreaction seen with malignant lesions. So that was a whirlwind tour of musculoskeletal imaging. The important stuff for narrating or highlighting red or things I stressed that may be pertinent for the exam. This is an unfortunate patient after a motor vehicle accident where their thoracic cord completely, their thoracic spine completely dislocated. So we have two thoracic. We have the thoracic The thoracic human body is over here, the thoracic over here, we normally see two thoracic human bodies to answer their posts to each other. If you have any questions, please reach out. Thanks so much.