Hello, I'm William Zaloga. I'm a DO, a pathologist at the Arkansas campus of NYIT, and this is a talk of the pathology of skeletal muscle in P-POM-1. I mean, here's my email. If you, feel free to send me any comments or questions, or unless you're here on the Arkansas campus, Come up to my office, room 424F, or you can call me at 870-680-8899. That's my office number. Okay, let's start. So, the objectives are going to start with a brief review of normal muscles and reactions that occur, such as degeneration and atrophy, and then we're going to go over some diseases that are categorized as different types of muscle and nerve diseases, and sometimes they of systemic manifestations as well. For example, this group here is going to involve neuron and inherited disorders. This group here is going to involve disorders of metabolism and and Inherited Mitochondrial Disorders and what's called Ion Channel Myopathies, down here these are going to be discussing inflammatory disorders that will affect muscles and other tissues of the body and down here we're going to discuss some autoimmune disorders and this is just another look at that, a brief review of normal injury and reactions and then under inherited we're going to look at these disorders inflammatory those disorders and these autoimmune disorders down here and that at the end there's a some miscellaneous map that these that we'll look at. This slide has a picture of electron micrograph of a muscle part of a muscle fiber in longitudinal section and here's a diagram that goes over a different parts of what's called the sarcomere and And it talks about various structures that are visualized when we look at this EM image, such as the H -band, the I-band, the A-band, which appears in lighter and darker regions, the Z-disc. And these function as a unit, the sarcomere, in series in a muscle fiber, which is a muscle cell with lots of sarcomers in series to move, to allow movement and stabilization of myosin seen here in red, these dark lines here, and actin, which you can barely see in this lighter region. And there's other proteins that are associated with stabilizing these structures within the sarcomere. In the Z-disc, that would be alpha-actinin. And one thing is that at the M line, that's where creatine kinase, or sometimes called creatine phosphokinase, is bound. And that serves as an ATP reserve for the muscle, which uses a lot of ATP. And it drives a reaction where ADP with phosphocreatine under the action of creatine kinase develops into ATP plus creatine. And creatine under the same enzyme, creatine kinase, can be turned back into phosphocreatine. And that's a muscle energy store because ATP would be used up in a muscle within seconds unless there was some sort of backup to provide that extra ATP. Here are the two types of myofibers that exist in muscles, and there's type 1 and type 2, and they have some descriptions here, and some examples of where these muscles are found. Paraspinal muscles, soleus muscles. so muscles that maintain the posture of a person and then there's other muscles which react more quickly to stimulation okay so that's why they're called slow slow twitch and fast twitch type muscles slow twitch have high levels of mitochondria and they have sustained contractions through oxidative phosphorylation, and they're utilized in endurance training. The fast-twitch fibers have low levels of mitochondria, they quickly fatigue, and they use anaerobic glycolysis, and they're used in weight resistance and sprinting, and when you look at a histologic stain, stained with, in this case, NADHTR, that's tetrazoleum reductase with, well, NADH, you know, that's the reduced form of ***. That stains a flash frozen tissue sample, and so they need to be specially handled so that these things will show the various staining of the tissue section. More densely darker appearance of the stain, and this is a cross -section, so we see a cross-section of the different myofibers. Those are going to be the type 1 oxidative fibers with a lot of NADH activity. And then we have type 2 that show the non-oxidative fibers, but they do show some purple speckling. And the thing to notice here is you see what's called a checkerboard pattern. So the motor neurons that are supplying this muscle have a small group of slow twitch fibers and a small group of fast twitch fibers, and they're intermixed like this. And here's a nice chart that goes over the major points of the type 1 and type 2 muscle fibers. And this is a review of normal histology. This is a cross -section of the muscle fibers, and you see there's connective tissue that had different names, perimuseum around the whole bundle of fibers, endomuseum around individual muscle fibers. And so there's a cross -section. Here's a longitudinal view. The longitudinal view we can look at first. There's the nuclei that you see at the periphery, not just under the plasma membrane, the sarco lemma of the muscle fiber, and these are multi -nucleated, very long cells, that's why they're called fibers. And those sarcomeres we talked about with the different lines that show up on EM, you can see them in the longitudinal sections. In the cross -sections, you see the multiple nuclei at the periphery and then the elements of the muscle fibers on H&E stain or protein cell stained pink. And then this is a normal muscle physiology that can... Okay, so during a contraction there's going to be a motor nerve from a motor neuron that will send an action potential to the motor end plate of the muscle, myofiber. And when When the action potential arrives, it will stimulate the increase of calcium that will release acetylcholine from the vesicle and the axon terminal. Then the acetylcholine will process synapse and interact with the acetylcholine receptor on the sarcolemma of the muscle. That will travel through the sarcolemma and then interact with receptors on the sarcolemma and the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The reticulum has a lot of the major store of calcium within the muscle cell. And these receptors, the DHPR, which is dihydropyridine, and the ryanidine receptor here, allow for the increase in sarcoplasmic, a lot of increase in sarcoplasm with increase of calcium within sarcoplasm which allows for muscle myofibrile contraction which are the elements within the muscle fiber that contract which are the myosin and the actin and then here's the continuation okay so I mentioned there's going to be an increase in calcium. Calcium will bind to troponin and then that will allow movement of tropomyosin, another protein, there's a lot of different proteins within the muscle fiber, to move and allow the head of the myosin fiber, which contains ADP and ATP, to interact with the binding site on actin and once that occurs then there can be movement of the myosin head along actin and that produces shortening of the troponin I'm sorry the myosin and actin fibers which produces contraction when ATP is restored after what's called the power ******, then when ATP is restored, then there can be detachment of the head of myosin from the binding site on actin and the process can start all over again and calcium is released and can be re -sequestered in the sarcoplasmic reticulum for the next contraction. Think about this one. All right, now we're going to talk about myogenic injury, what's called myopathic injury, and that's contrasted to neurogenic in just a little bit. So with myogenic injury, there's going to be a segment or just part of a myofiber or muscle cell that undergoes degeneration, and with degeneration, there will be regeneration. So, part of the myofiber will undergo necrosis, and with that, there will be release of creatine kinase into the blood from damaged cells, so that will be a marker of a blood test. And if you look under the microscope, you'll see macrophages that will remove damaged components, and that's called myofagocytosis. With regeneration, there's going to be activated satellite cells that are near the nuclei of the myofiber and they will those are myocyte stem cells and once they're activated they will differentiate into new nuclei that will govern the repair of that myofiber they'll stain basophilic if you look under the microscope which will appear a little bit maybe purple a little more not not as much pink and or orange pink not as he is in a phillic but what's called basophilic a little more purple under the microscope because there's a high level of RNA that's being produced and with with disease complete regeneration might not be possible because that chronic disease process might outpace the regenerative capacity of the tissue or due to the extent of the damage. Myofibrohypertrophy is a physiologic response to exercising, but it can be associated with diseases. And we'll look at one of those. Then this line down here, it's just referring that in disease, certain inclusions, and there's some are listed here. Help as clues to the diagnosis. Okay. And this goes over neurogenic injuries. And these are the histologic sections which can be seen. And I already mentioned that there will be a checkerboard pattern seen in D. If you state it for enzyme within into the type 1 and type 2 myofibers. It should be small groups that are interspersed within a muscle, and these are all cross-sections. And these two cross -sections are showing disorders that occur. So any disorder that's going to interrupt the motor neuron supplying the various groups that it supplies within a muscle will undergo a reaction where they will become atrophic and this will be seen as a group, whatever that nerve is applying, as flattened and angular shapes. Then with re-innervation, what is happening is that the motor nerves that are adjacent to the groups of fibers that are undergoing denervation and atrophy will send sprouts to those motor fibers, to those myofibers, which are undergoing denervation and atrophy, and then resupply them. So these spouts will allow them to be restored, so the proteins and the function of those fibers will be restored. However, this checkerboard pattern is going to be lost, and that large group from whatever the nerve was, was applying all the adjacent myofibers, will turn this into very large groups of the same myofiber type, and so you lose your checkerboard pattern. That's called fiber type grouping. Alright, now these two histologic images, these are H&E stains, so you see pink, orange is pink, sometimes it's more pale than others of all the proteins within these cells, compared and contrasted of neurogenic versus myopathic injuries, it could be myogenic as well. And we talked about these two already, but this contrasts them. So, with neurogenic injury, what we're going to see is that flattening of a group of myofibers that the nerve was supplying, and I'm outlining it here, and then the other ones surrounding it. Some of them may become hypertrophy, you know, larger than you would normally see because they're, the hypertrophy is occurring based on the stresses that the muscle is subject to, and these fibers are to contribute because they don't have the innervation, but they can be restored and myofiber grouping will occur, as we talked about before. And then we have myopathic injury. What you're going to see here is that there will be necrosis and there will be regeneration and just a segment. So all of these in here, you can see some of them are small, some of them are darker than others, some of them are more pale. So, with necrotic cells, you'll see them lose their stain and these two might be an example here of cells that are becoming necrotic and you see a lot of them becoming very small and shrinking. And also, the cytoplasm will condense and become irregular. Here there is some irregularity of the staining and you don't see, well that looks irregular and shrunk, lighter here, darker here. So there's going to be increased variability of the fiber size. There is variability here, but that has a characteristic pattern of this group. They're flattened and angular. And they'll increase variability, and then with regeneration, that will show increased central nucleation, so the nuclei of myofibers are normally supposed to be at the periphery. Here we have central nucleation and it's more basophilic because of RNA initially, but then it becomes hyperchromatic and then the nuclei will become more peripheral. So these are more darkly intense staining than the normal pink staining that you see here, and some of them are hypertrophic. Then you see the nuclei being more peripheral. This one is a little bit more early in its regenerative phase. And these ones down here are very early during regeneration. And you see some of them, they have that basophilic color where they look a bit more purple, and these can recover. Okay, here's the list of inherited diseases of skeletal muscle. There are many, many diseases of skeletal muscle, so we can't go through them all. But we'll go over some important ones or ones that are significant just because of the significant illness that they cause. Okay, inherited refers to genetic, so a path from parent to child. Down here we have congenital ones, so you probably understand that congenital are present at birth, and they may be genetic, or there can be some environmental cause, such as a teratogen that the person was exposed to. It doesn't have to be inherited. These other ones are inherited. there's abnormal genes are being passed and so we'll start with this one all right spinal muscular atrophy has several there are several different types that were discovered SMA1 is a progressive disease and the most severe is also called Wardnick Hoffman disease usually has a childhood onset it's inherited, autosomal recessive, and because it's a genetic disorder, it's going to be loss of function of a gene. So I guess what's important here is to remember the demographics, so we have childhood, and then how it's going to present, and then since it's inherited, what might be the genetic disorder that's actually causing it. Maybe not so much the, unless I talk about it, or it's stressed or highlighted, but the genetic disorder here, it's underlined. And it does cause effect in the splicey zone, so RNA splicing might not be working appropriately. What happens is that there's a loss of motor neuron innervation, and that will result in muscle weakness, so that's presentation and atrophy, and it will be denervation of skeletal muscles. So you're going to be looking for fiber -type grouping if a biopsy is done, but it's important to know the clinical features so you'll know if a biopsy is something you want to do. occurs in infants generally with a, and remember floppy infant, generalized hypotonia, little muscle tone, within four months of birth, usually death by two, three years. So for diagnosis, a biopsy can be performed, and because it's a denervation, you'll see lots of groups with flattened aneurous cells, and then you might see hypertrophied cells around that that are taking over the muscle function. And eventually you'll see fiber-type grouping as these extend their axons to the damaged fibers that have lost their axons. So that's what you'll see characteristically. And these larger cells, they're going to be retaining, those are the cells retaining their innovation. Okay, next is muscular dystrophies. And once again, they are genetic disorders. There is two of the most common, which are Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscular dystrophy. And they are linked because they involved this gene location, it's an X -linked disorder, and it encodes a protein called dystrophin, which is one of the sarcoplasmic proteins important for stabilizing contraction of muscles. It's a progressive muscle weakness due to damage as the child develops and wasting, usually beginning in early childhood. Duchesne is more severe than Becker's, usually death by 20 to 30 years, so demographics are important to remember. Becker is milder later in onset. And here are two diagrams which go over normal structures is bound below the sarcolemma or the plasma membrane of the myofiber and how it connects to the extracellular matrix. There's a protein here called dystrophin and complexes associated with that, laminin and all these proteins here that help us transmit forces to the extracellular matrix as contraction occurs from actin and myosin. If myocytes degenerate when there's an abnormal dystrophin or it's absent and there's going to be progressive micro myocyte damage that occurs over time and it's going to exceed the regenerative capacity because as contraction occurs without this strong connection and also the stabilization to the extracellular matrix, a lot of the force is going to be transmit to the plasma membrane, and that's going to produce repeated damage of myofibers. And they will regenerate over time, but they might not be able to regenerate completely as the disease progresses. This is another diagram, which is showing a lot of the same thing. You have actin and dystrophins attachment to that, and there's proteins that attach that to the plasma membrane, and then other proteins that are going to attach it to the extracellular matrix proteins as well, X-linked recessive, and it results in an absent dystrophy gene. So that's not present at all, and that results in chronic muscle damage with usage. And so you just need to think about the muscles that have a lot of usage. Those might be the ones that, for the heart, for example, or because this is present within cardiac muscle. And the muscles of, you know, like with walking or posture, you know, those sorts of muscles like that. And well, those are going to be the ones where it's affected. Later on, there will be other muscles. There will be the respiratory diaphragm, which has a lot of muscle activity and that will become damaged over time as well, but we'll talk about that. and here's what you see on the histopathology so these are individual myofibers that are going to be affected they could be type 1 type 2 and so early in the disease you'll see that segmental myofiber degeneration because it's a myopathic disease so it'll be a mixture of atrophic fibers so these small ones that are becoming lighter as proteins are not there's not as much proteins that are organized there to maintain the stain. Here's one regenerating. You see that irregular staining and you see a more central nucleus here so there's regeneration going on and then it doesn't look like a group, it's just a mixture of hypertrophied, degenerating myofibers. And then you see this here. As these myofibers degenerate, it'll be replaced by fibrous and fatty tissue, and that's called fatty infiltration as disease progresses. And this causes what's called pseudohypertrophy. For example, I said those are going to be the muscles that have a lot of usage, you know, as a child develops. The ones for posture and stabilizing posture, I mentioned the torso, walking, things like that. the remaining myofibers will have prominent variation in size, small atrophic and large hypertrophy, and then fatty infiltration and fibrous tissue that infiltrates as well. Here is a sign that helps with the diagnosis, and if you remember the demographic skin, it occurs at an early age. It's X-linked, so it'll be males predominantly, and the life expectancy will be about 25 to 30 years. First, there'll be weakness of pelvic girdle muscles, so once again, muscles that are retaining posture and being used a lot, and then extend of the shoulder muscles, you know, for movement of the arms. Then, of course, calf muscles are going to be affected. There'll be weakness and pseudohypertrophy. So, it'll seem weak, but they will have enlarged muscles, and that's due to the fat and the fibrous tissue. And one of the signs that we discovered a long time ago was what's called Gower's Maneuver. And a patient with muscle weakness will attempt to arise from a supine or seated position on the floor, and they push themselves up or climb up their legs with their hands because of the muscle weakness. That's Gower's Maneuver. Okay, Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Clinically, you'll see proximal muscle weakness, pseudohypertrophy of the calf muscles, and we talk about why that is, and explain Gower's maneuver, and you'll see Gower's sign. And you can develop later as the disease progresses worsening respiratory reserve, and I explain that as well. Cardiomyopathy, because their dystrophin is present in the heart muscle, and there's a small amount in nerve cells of the brain, so there can be some intellectual impairment. Later in disease, early, I'm sorry, there'll be increased serum creatinine kinase as the muscles are damaged, and damaged muscles will release their creatine, when I say creatinine, It's not creatinine. It's creatine kinase. Creatinine is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate, and it's a cyclic form that is filtered in the kidney and through the blood, and it can be used to measure GFR in patients. So that's creatinine. Death may result, but commonly results from respiratory insufficiency in the 20s and 30s. The treatment currently is supportive. There have been efforts to manipulate the condition that's causing it, which is an RNA splicing disorder. Okay, now there's Becker muscular dystrophy. And once again, it affects a dystrophin gene, so there's a mutation. It's also X -linked recessive, but there's a partial function of the dystrophin protein. So it's less severe, has a slower progression, presents later, may have a normal life expectancy, and instead of presenting early in childhood, he usually starts presenting adolescence or even into adulthood. The treatment, once again, is still supportive care. Okay, here's a question over some of the stuff we went over. It's quite a bit, but should be able to do this, so maybe try to answer the question. The next slide is an answer, so if you want to answer it now, that would be good, but Or you can just look at the answer. But we'll just go over a few things. Four-year -old boy, so child, tires easily, falls a lot, weakness, pelvis, arms, and large calf muscles. So you kind of already know what it is. Serum creatine kinase. Biopsy is done. Shows mark variation and size and shape of the muscle fibers. Muscle necrosis, regeneration, fibrosis. So, what's the most likely eventual cause of death? So we're talking about DMD, and we mentioned that the respiratory insufficiency in the 20s and 30s was the most common cause of death in these individuals. Okay, hearty malaphyde is common as well. Okay, now myotonic dystrophy, so you see the name here, myotonic, so there's going to be some myotonous that might be involved, and that would be a good sign to remember. And it's inherited again, autosomal dominant and a trinucleotide repeat onset. twenty to four years. This triplet expansion involves myotonin protein kinase, there's the gene, and once again an RNA splicing disorder. What it does is cause a disorder of chloride channels. Okay, those are involved with muscle relaxation, and that leads to myotonia. So it's an ion channel, ion channelopathy. Myotonia is an inability to relax your muscles. There's a slow relaxation phase, prolonged contraction. So it commonly presents, and this is a sign to remember, grip myotonia, can't relax, sustain grip. There is progressive progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and these are some other signs that you can develop their chloride channels all over the place in your body. And there can be arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy, increase serum CPK as their muscle damage occurs from progressive muscle wasting. Like I said, I said channelopathy, also called ion channel myopathy, like myotonic dystrophy. Okay, so these are inherited again, and depending on the channel that is affected, they can produce different signs and symptoms. So they can produce hypertonia or hypotonia. There is subclassification of some of them based on the potassium levels that are present in the blood. It can be hyperkalemic, hypokalemic, normokalemic, and those are in conditions called periodic paralysis. So the clinical manifestations, you know, because it depends on the ion channels and where they're located in the body, can produce epilepsy, migraines, movement disorders, cerebellum dysfunction, peripheral nerve disease, muscle disease, so that there can be various systemic signs. And these are some examples. This is a calcium channel, and there's a lot of different proteins involved with calcium channels, this one down here as well, and there's a mutation, and that's the most common cause of hypokalemic paralysis, so low potassium with paralysis. This mutation here, that was also present in myotonic dystrophy that we just talked about, and its expression is decreased in myotonic dystrophy, okay? So this is like a repeat of what we just talked about. Here is a channel that regulates calcium release from a sarcoplasmic reticulum, and they are involved with various disorders, including congenital myopathy, a congenital myopathy -like central core disease, and another one called malignant hyperthermia that we'll talk about next. malignant hyperthermia. So as the name implies, there's going to be fever, a high fever that's involved, and it can be very severe. And it is rare, but there can be and it's inherited, there can be life-threatening skeletal muscle contractions and channelopathy, due to this channelopathy. The pathogenesis is autosomal dominant because these individuals will inherit a mutation of the ryanidine receptor and that's involved in controlling calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This increased calcium release follows administration of halogenated inhaled anesthetics and also succinylcholine which is used for temporary paralysis during certain procedures like antitracheal intubation and others, many others. It has rapid onset and short duration of muscle relaxation, which is a reason people like to use it. The mechanism is that those chemicals interact with the mutated receptor and cause increased calcium efflux, and that leads to, among other symptoms, tetany, and a lot of heat production. This causes clinically a hypermetabolic state with hyperthermia, the temperature can exceed 106 degrees, so it can be life -threatening, severe muscle contractions, tetany, tachycardia, tachypnea, and it occurs in predisposed patients with that inherited mutation. The treatment is dantrolene because it is a ryanidine receptor antagonist. So dantrolene, tetany, hyperthermia, and here's another question. Okay, so once again, you can go ahead and try to answer it because I think it's pretty clear, but the answer is next if you want to look at that. Okay. And so we'll just go over it. That's a 25 -year-old male. Okay. Appendectomy in the OR. After a few minutes of getting succinylcholine, hypertension, tachypnea, elevated respiratory rate, temperatures elevated. So, a mutation in which of the following is likely, okay, and we went over all of the, well, we didn't go over this one, but I'm assuming you went over this sometime during your hematopoietic lectures, and so, what are we looking at here? Well, the Rheanodyne receptor, but malignant hyperthermia, hyperthermia. Okay, next is going to be some congenital myopathies. And once again, there's going to be a mutation of a gene that affects the brianidine receptor, you know, like I was mentioning earlier. It's just not only the hypothermia, something like central core disease. The clinical features are going to be hypotonia at birth, okay? So, it's just a different mutation. It's associated with other abnormalities, but can include malignant hypothermia. And so, central core disease, because what they found when they were staining for different enzymes and proteins within a muscle biopsy, this is a cross -section, is that the central region shows areas of reduced enzyme activity and just appear as a clear vacuole, sometimes in the center, sometimes more at the periphery, and so that's why it's named central core disease. It helps with the diagnosis and then you probably do mutation molecular studies to determine if this was a mutation that a person may have. Another one is called nemaline myopathy, and nemaline myopathy is, once again, inherited autosomal dominant or recessive. They found some genes that are affected. And those mutations of protein involve the thin filament actin, the sarcomere. So there's going to be contractile dysfunction and protein aggregates, which lead to damage of muscle fibers. And that leads to muscle weakness. So, it will appear as, at birth, the floppy baby syndrome, and it's called nemoline because there will be thread-like rods, best seen in a longitudinal section. I have here a cross -section, and you can kind of see what the rods would look like, but they look like spindle-shaped particles, you know, actin fibers are not developing correctly, so they're aggregating with each other. and they can appear as dark areas just below the plasma membrane or within the sarcoplasmic reticulum and you kind of see some dark speckling here and you know a spindle shaped area right there and over here you see something over over there okay it's best to get additional stains so if If you were specializing in muscle pathology, you probably want to get a Gomorrah's trichrome because that makes them show up more clearly. Next are going to be disorders of lipid or glycogen metabolism. So once again, another inherent disorder that's disrupting proteins that function within the body. There are general patterns clinically of muscle dysfunction. So, symptomatic people who exercise or fast with some of these disorders can experience muscle cramping or rhabdomyolysis. Or, and that'll be periodic because it's when you exercise or when you fast. It's not all the time. Or, they're going to be slowly progressive muscle damage. No episodic symptoms. There are some examples, and we'll talk about each of these. This carnitine palmitoyotransferase 2 deficiency involves free fatty acid transport into the myocondria. Myoposphorylase 50, which is also known as McCardle's disease, has episodic damage in myoglobinuria. Acid maltase, pompeze disease, impairs lysosomal conversion of glycogen to glucose. And now we'll start to go over these ones. Okay, carnitine, pomatomotransferase 2 deficiency, the most common disorder of lipid metabolism. So you get a toxic buildup of fatty acids in the cytosol or the sarcoplasm muscle cells. And that impairs transport, it's due to impaired transport into the mitochondria. So you get episodic damage, again, with exercise or fasting. so remember that. And clinically, you'll see hypotonia, you might see dilated cardiomyopathy. So given that, what you know right there, you might do molecular studies to help confirm what you're thinking about. The next one will be McArdle disease. It's also known as type 5 deficiency, and it has an inability to break down glycogen, and here's type 5, so there's going to be an enzyme here that allows that process to be done, so you get a buildup of glycogen within the muscles. So remember, painful muscle cramps, myoglobinuria, arrhythmia because of electrolyte imbalances, normal blood glucose because the liver is unaffected. There is a test that you can do in this case, it's the lactate ammonia test, so during exercise, so this is episodic, that helps you with determining what you might be dealing with. The venous lactate curve is flat, so normally with exercise that rises, just like ammonia, but it's flat compared with a normal rise, so I can give you a big clue that this might be what you're dealing with, the cartiloses. The treatment here, because it's a disorder of carbohydrates, is to limit carbohydrates and have a careful exercise routine. Pompe's disease, that's type 2 deficiency, once again, impaired breakdown of glycogen, but this involves the lysosome, and it's a clinical feature, it's going to involve the heart, so you can have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, liver and muscles can be affected. And the hypoconia can be severe and present in infancy, there's exercise intolerance deficiency, mild deficiency will affect respiration, and early death in patients with general systemic type symptoms are seen. Here is the treatment, sometimes enzyme replacement of this enzyme right here, isosoma acid alpha one for glucosidase, replacement works for some patients, not all. Now we're going to talk about mitochondrial DNA. Okay because you have the word mitochondrial here, it's a disorder that involves mutations of mitochondrial DNA, so it's going to have a maternal inheritance. All the children are going to be affected by an affected female. So there's mutations in impaired ATP generation, so there's going to be low ATP in various muscles. But not just muscles, because mitochondria are throughout your body. But it affects skeletal muscles and other tissues prominently that have a high ATP requirement, like cardiac muscle, so the dysrhythmia can be seen, even neurons, seizures can be seen. And there's a syndrome that we're going to talk about next called MIRF syndrome. And I probably should have put drug treatment there for that. But we can go over it real quick. So drugs that improve cellular respiration, and these are some. They're not highlighted, but metformin, creatine, L -carnitine, clonazepam, barmyoclonus, manicomulsants. Some of the signs you'll see with skeletal muscles will be weakness and an increase in serum CK or CPK, creatine phosphokinase, or sometimes it's called creatine kinase, and even rhabdomyolysis. Weakness is variable, but here it tends to involve the muscles around the eyes, and there's going to be chronic progressive, what's called external ophthalmoplegia. So, the muscles that are external to the eyes will be affected and not function properly. So, extracurricular muscles, eyelids, eyebrows, blurred, double vision. And that's a common feature in mitochondrial vessel nerves. Now we're going to talk about this MRF syndrome. And MRF stands for myoclonic epilepsy. So, myoclonus is going to be involved with ragged red fibers. And ragged red fibers refers to a particular stain, in this case, the modified Gamori trichrome. And I mentioned that would have been useful in an emily broad myopathy because you'll see these red-purple aggregates within damaged muscle fibers. So that's where the ragged red fibers come from, red deposits and the muscle stain. And, let's see, those red deposits are going to show the accumulation of affected mitochondria in the sub-sarcalemal region of the myofibers. The laboratory will show serum creatine kinase will be elevated. Alright, so clinically, it will be characterized predominantly by intermittent muscle twitches, so-called myotonous and it'll be progressive myoclonus myoclonus involves the sudden jerks that can occur and there are some that are happening in healthy people for example hiccups or a form of myoclonus or those sudden jerks and some i don't know i've experienced it i'm assuming others have, also called sleep starts. Sleep starts just before falling asleep and these occur in healthy people and really form a problem. Weakness is going to happen in the limb girdle, shoulder, pelvic muscles initially, and then progressive stiffness, spasticity, and I mentioned how to diagnose this with the muscle biopsy, and the seizures, in addition to myoclonus, they can be generalized tonic -clonic, absent seizures, atonic, and I mentioned the Mori-trichrome stain that shows the ragged red fibers. There's another form of mitochondrial neuropathy called Leber's Hereditary Optic Neuropathy, and that's mentioned here because it commonly presents with, again, just like a lot of these mitochondrial myopathies, but predominantly with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. And it does, it primarily affects adult males and it's a different mitochondrial mutation from this MRF syndrome. So it's going to be having a different presentation predominantly affecting the eye muscles. Okay, now we'll look at, okay, so as it says here, inflammation affecting your muscles. These are going to be immune mediated, not infectious, involving your skeletal muscles. So you'll see immune cells, also antibodies that will be pathogenic. The primary symptoms are going to be weakness and pain of the muscle myalgias. And here's the examples, and we'll discuss these. Dermatomyositis. It's a rare disorder involving inflammation in the skin. The peak age is going to be 50 to 60, more common in females, and it's immune -mediated. What the immune reaction is affecting is the small blood vessels of the muscles that lead to muscle damage. It gradually worsens over weeks to months, and it can last for several years and resolve as an immune-mediated disease, or it can be lifelong. There are treatments that can be done. Things to remember, I want to remember a presentation. It has a classic skin rash. Remember lilac or heliotrope rash. I'll show you an image. Red-purple rash, eyelids, periorval edema. You can also have skin manifestations. I mentioned here, Gotron's papules. That's scaling red eruptions, dusky patches on the knuckles, elbows, and knees. Proximal muscles are weak first, but there are other disorders that affect proximal muscles and eventually progress. And the 10 foot, this is good to remember, it helps you characterize what kind of disorder you're dealing with. Symmetric, slow onset, muscle pain, you can produce dysphagia if the muscles of swallowing are affected. It can have extra muscular involvement, including lung disease, myocarditis. Good thing to remember, I highlighted malignancy here. 24% with dermatomyositis have malignancy, and I list several of them here that have them associated. So, once again, autoimmune disease. So, for some reason, your body's been stimulated to make antibodies that actually attack tissues in your own body. Small vessel damage, capillaries are attacked. antibodies in complement, would produce ischemic myocyte necrosis. Cause is unknown, so just like with a lot of autoimmune diseases, there's genetic, immunologic, and environmental factors that have been indicated, and it's still being sorted out. Some things they have found in people are anti-MI2 antibodies that are associated with the skin disorder, the dotron-pactyl and heliotrope crack, heliotropic crash, or just heliotrope. Anti -JO1 antibodies are associated with lung disease and arthritis. Since autoimmune, these antibodies are coursing through your circulation, affecting different tissues. Also, you can have arthritis, lung disease, and you can also have what's called a mechanic hand rash. And I'll just show you that here. You've got cracked, roughened skin resulting on the tips and lateral aspects of the fingers. So, you know, mechanics use their hands a lot, and sometimes they end up with dry, cracked hands with a dirty line appearance, and that's what you can see, even if they're not a mechanic. These are Gotron's papules, and you see these erythematous patches. and here's the heliotrope rash associated with dermatomyositis. Alright. Okay. Some diagnostic aspects of dermatomyositis in order to confirm what you think based on your clinical history and presentation. A biopsy might be indicated and what you would look for is part of the immune system complement within the capillary beds. Histologically, you'll see perifascicular inflammation, atrium, myofibers, and loss of vessels. And what you'll find are a lot of inflammatory cells there in that location. Those tend to be CD4-type T helper cells. And when we say perifascicular, so here is a group of muscle fibers being surrounded by what's called the epimysium, and what you'll see, so this will be a fascicle, and the perimysium is going to surround muscle fibers, create a fascicle. And out here, you'll see the inflammatory process affecting these. You see that they're shrunk. Some are trying to regenerate. This one's got a blue hue, so that these ones, but some of them are losing their stain because they're becoming necrotic. This one's actually a bit hypertrophied, you know, trying to recover some of the muscle function of this group of muscle fibers here. So peripesticular atrophy, and that's, this is good to remember, it'll be in a paramesian infiltration in a paramesial distribution, and here's the paramesium around this fascicle. You can also see it here, where you have atrophy occurring and degeneration. So we talked about the autoantibodies, so blood tests can be done to check for those. they'll have increased creatinine kinase due to muscle damage treatment because it's immune and will be immunosuppressives. Now this is polymyositis. So polymyositis is going to be similar to dermatomyositis. It is an inflammatory disease, just like that, and it's immune-mediated, non-infectious, affecting proximal muscles like the other, but no skin involvement, mainly in adults. Peaconset is here, remember that. It can affect the heart, lungs, blood vessels, and women are more often affected. Once again, it can last several years and resolve or be lifelong. What you'll see that's causing this problem is immune cells, in this case it's going to be CD8 cytotoxic T-cells, which produce tissue damage. There's no vascular injury in contrast to dermatomyositis. Once again, not genetic, but it's not fully understood, you know, how this disease occurs. There are risk factors, just like a dermatomyositis or other autoimmune diseases. Having an autoimmune disease is a risk factor for having another autoimmune disease. And what you'll see is not paramezial inflammation and myocyte degeneration, but you'll see endomiesial inflammation, so individual myofibers. And you'll find prominently CD8 cells in that region of the necrotic and regenerating muscle fibers, and that's going to be scattered throughout the basical. There's going to be no perifascicular like dermatomyositis. Clinically, just like dermato, you'll see myalgia, proximal muscle weakness, increased creatinine kinase, and treatment, once again, to me, disorder, immunosuppressive agents. All right, so this next slide compares these two disorders. I already showed you dermatomyositis. This is an image of polymyositis in a cross-section of a muscle, stained with H&E. And you can see a lot of small cells with non -autocytoplasmic nuclei. Those are immune cells. And they're surrounding the endomysium of individual muscle fibers, you know, scattered throughout. And you'll see some atrophy as you shrink. And this is a good stain over here. So CD8 cells, endomysial inflammation. Dermatocytes has perimesial inflammation, CD4 cells, complement activation. Okay, once again, here's the perimesium around the fascicle. Here's the endomysium around individual muscle fibers. Inclusion body myositis. That is the most common inflammatory myopathy in patients above 68 years old. Once again, unclear pathogenesis, really unclear if it's inflammatory or degenerative. What you'll see, but there's a degeneration of those muscle fibers. You'll see distal muscles involved first, contrast with dermato and poly, that's going to be proximal, and it can be asymmetric, that contrasts these two disorders as well. It's going to be slowly progressive weakness, most severe in the quadriceps and distal extremities. There can be dysphagia as well if those muscles are affected. And it's called an inclusion body because what you'll find are degraded organelles within the sarcoplasm of these muscle fibers. And you can see they can be at the periphery more centrally, but a lot of degraded organelles. They contain a lot of cytoplasmic other contents in the myofibers. You could see, well you will see, CD8 endomesial infiltration similar to polymyositis, but it's not going to be as prominent, but you can find that, and it might have something to do with the degeneration of these myofibers. And you'll find a different antibody than the others, there'll be CN1A antibody positive in about half of them, and a moderately increased CK, and treatment is immunosuppressives and IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin, helps as well, it's an immunomodulator, but that's not as effective as the other inflammatory myopathies, so remember the age and what you see in the myofibers, and you'll see what are called inclusion bodies, so degenerated organelles with some of these bodies can have vacualizations of them. And once again, this is a Gomorya trichrome stain. So the diagnosis of these inflammatory myopsies involves clinical symptoms, laboratory, and biopsy. You can also do EMG studies, and I don't go into great detail about that, but there are certain signs looking for neurogenic and myopathic findings, and there's going to be a mixed pattern in these inflammatory myopathies. So you send someone to the lab and they'll do EMT and that would confirm what you think. It could be an inflammatory myopathy. Here's a question. Once again, you can maybe try to answer it on your own. The answer is on the next page. If you can just look at this right away, here's a biopsy H&E stain. And you see a lot of these lymphocytes. And so here's the endomysium, okay, so the fibrovascular layer around the individual myofibers. And you see some of them, this one looks a little more blue, this one looks a little more blue. So these could be at the beginning of regenerations. They've got central nuclei. These ones are going to be affected. And these, well, there's another one that's affected. There's another one that's shrinking, losing its coloration of the sarcoplasm. So, endomesial. But let's look at this. 35-year-old female. Difficulty washing her hair and ascending stairs. So, muscle girdle. Proximal muscle is affected. It's been going on for about six months. Okay, so she wasn't born with this. It's something that just started. No other complaints. So, he orders a biopsy, and this is what they find. They see endomesial inflammation, lymphocytes. So what's the diagnosis? We just went over this. What we're looking at here is polymyositis, endomesial. Next two disorders, myasthenia gravis and Lambert-Eaton, myasthenic syndrome. They're shown here. The disorders, etiology on the right is Lambert-Eaton, and on the left, myasthenia gravis. And what you see here are pathogenic antibodies, myasthenia gravis, acetylcholine receptor. Lambert-Eton antibodies to the calcium channel on the axon terminal. Okay, so we'll just go over these real quick. They're autoimmune, these autoantibodies are attacking body zone tissue for some reason. But we'll look at some of the clinical and diagnostic features to help distinguish them. So, myasthenia, autoimmune mediated loss of acetylcholine receptors, and we see that here, autoantibodies, and again, destruction of the receptor, so you have a limited response of acetylcholine due to the lack of sufficient receptors. Okay, so some clinical features that are going to help distinguish these two and give you clues that this is going to be the disorder you're dealing with is young females 20 to 40 but there's a bimodal distribution it could be older males and women are most commonly affected if it arises before the age of 40 if this disorder. Okay, painless weakness and with fatigue it gets worse with repeated exertion. Right. Diplopia and ptosis if those muscles are affected. And good to remember that thymic abnormalities are associated. So part of the immune system that controls generation of immune cells and antibodies is abnormal. So you can see that especially in young patients, and what you may find is thymoma or thymic hyperplasia. Young people, 10% have thymoma, 30% in patients who are usually younger have hyperplasia. So there's, once again, EMG studies that can be done. Electrophysiology is checking the muscles, and you'll have decreased response with repeated stimulation. So it gets worse with repeated exertion. Nerve conduction studies show that the conduction of the acupotensils are normal. Treatment is going to be acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Try that first because that inhibits acetylcholinesterase. So that will increase acetylcholine and you'll get reverse muscle weakness. So it's kind of a confirmatory test. Other treatments are going to be plasmapheresis, which is an attempt to remove antibodies from the plasma of the individual. immunosuppressive, it's an immune disorder, and thymectomy if they have a thymoma. Compare that to Lambert-Eaton. Okay, with Lambert -Eaton, this is rare. It affects males in contrast to females. It's autoimmune disorder. The peak age is around 35 years with the onset, but a larger peak occurs at 60 years. So it This disorder, just like myasthenia gravis, can occur for many years, or it can be a lifelong disorder. Pathogenesis is, once again, autoantibodies, but this time against the presynaptic calcium channel. That prevents acetylcholine release, because without calcium influx, this vesicle won't release acetylcholine across the synapse. and clinically to distinguish it from myasthenia is that they have muscle weakness but it improves with exertion contrast myasthenia there can be autonomic symptoms such as dry mouth constipation and 50% so it's important to remember have an associated malignancy and I list a couple of them here so with all these autoimmune diseases Patients may have another autoimmune disease, so that's a risk factor for this syndrome as well. Diagnosis, electrophysiologic studies, EMGs. Repetitive stimulation in this case improves muscle response, so the opposite of myasthenia gravis. Once again, autoimmune disorder. Drugs that increase the release of acetylcholine into the synapse can be tried. And then immunosuppressive agents, you know, immune disorder. okay here's another question and the answer is going to be next so try to answer it well I had a bunch of stuff I didn't do that but it's okay the answer is on the next page 21 year old 24 year old female new onset of blurry vision worse at the end of the day. Okay, so a lot of use over eyes and eye muscles, it gets worse. And drooping of the eyelids. EMG findings are significant for diminished muscle response after repeated stimulation. So what's the mechanism for this? Oh, I'm already going with the answer. Oh, okay. Here, antibodies against acetylcholine we're talking about myasthenia gravis this describes myasthenia gravis this is the cause of Lambert Eaton syndrome and this is going to be there's a ryanodine receptor mutation that no okay ryanodine receptor mutation and immune mediated endomysial inflammation okay so it's not polymyocidins Okay, here are some, here's a summary of the disorders we've gone over and just some, a quick review, just a couple of slides of, you know, some of the major things of these disorders. SMA1, autosomal obsessive, and floppy baby hypotonia. Duchenne's, absent dystrophin, pseudohypertrophy of calf muscles, Gower's sign. Becker's, muscular dystrophy, partially functioning dystrophin, less severe. Myotonic dystrophy, ion channel deficiency due to this trinucleotide repeat. And with myotonia, malignant hypothermia, once again, This is a ryanidine receptor disorder, and that causes increased calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and it's associated with inhaled anesthetics and succinylcholine, at least a hypermetabolic state. Congenital myopathies, once again, ryanidine receptor, and it can lead to hypotonia. And then there's nemaline rod biopathy and floppy baby syndrome, once again, nemaline rods on biopsy, as seen with gomorius trichrome. And then lipid metabolism, not there yet, decreases diseases of lipid metabolism. The one we talked about was carnitine pulpitotransferase II deficiency, so that's impaired transport to free fatty acids into the mitochondria and build up in the cytosol, episodic is going to be when you have muscle damage, weakness, pain, with exercise or fasting, okay, and it can cause disturbance of the heart with dilated cardiomyopathy. Diseases of glycogen metabolism, remember McCardle disease, also has type 2 deficiency, Pompe disease, I mean type 5 deficiency, McCardle's, Pompe's is type 2 deficiency, and there's the enzymes that are affected. So those are deficient, and this is episodic muscle damage with exercise, painful cramps, maybe myoclonaria, and normal glucose, okay? And then Pompe's disease will show impaired glycogen senses within the lysosome, it can also affect the heart, those muscles as well with cardiomyopathy, and they show exercise intolerance of skin. Minochondrial myopathies, transmission from the mother, an affected mother, impairs ATP P-generation, so tissues that use a lot of ATP, muscles, brain, those will be affected. I didn't mention Miele syndrome. There's a lot of different disorders where lactic acidosis is occurring. So, don't use that as something that's going to help you with mitochondrial myopathies. But you have elevated CK, and these are commonly associated with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. and I've already gone on for a while so but there's a lot of diseases we left out a bunch it was the last slide too okay last slide is okay the lecture feedback form I'd appreciate feedback. Well, there it was, but it's also in the PowerPoint. Sorry, I couldn't show you here. And so please send feedback. I'd appreciate that. And email me with questions, comments, or call me. Or if you're here in Arkansas, just come up to room 424F and we'll have a chat. And thank you for your time and attention.