Welcome to the Innate Immunity 1 and 2 lectures. These lectures expand on the previous semester in Immunity 1 and Immunity 2 lectures. So if you're feeling like you need to go back and review those to refresh yourself and make sure you have that basis to develop further information from here, that might be not a bad idea. These are the objectives that we need to cover. So basically we're going to be able to compare and contrast innate and adaptive immune response and then we'll go into more focusing on the innate immune response and talk about the first and second line of defenses and different components of those. We'll focus predominantly on the innate processes of inflammation, psychocytosis, fever, the interferon response, and complement option. In those we're going to be talking about the role of cytokines and all these different NMA processes and specifically discuss and talk about the role of pattern recognition receptors and the importance of those in initiating the inflammatory response. And at the end we'll talk about some deficiencies of innate immunity and the type of diseases that this could lead to. One of the key things and we have discussed this last semester is to distinguish between innate and adaptive immune response and some of the key differences and so of course obviously they're both part of the immune response but then we have to distinguish the importance of one of them is that there's a lot of overlap between the two but remember this this type of distinction is a little bit artificial because and in regard to the immune system it all functions as a unit but there are ways to distinguish the response of each and there's typically a different timeline set up for each. So usually the innate immune response is always X first. And then if things are not resolved, the adaptive immune response comes in. So again, there's a, you know, they're very common. It's all part of the same response. There's a lot of cells that overlap and activate and one lead to the other. And there's a positive impact between the two. You know, obviously macrophages, for example, regulate the inflammatory response and they're responsible for the innate immune response but at the same time they do present antigen activate the helper cells which then activates the adaptive immune response so keep that in mind some of the key things differences are listed in this table so for example the innate immune response is non -specific quality adaptive is very specific the innate immune response doesn't really learn from the encounter it's the same there's no memory that develops like the adaptive immune response. Also the innate immune response is instantaneous and it's always available while the adaptive immune response, at least the initial one or the primary, is usually slow. The secondary, after it learns and memory develops, becomes much faster. The innate immune response, as we've discussed before, is divided into the first line and second line defense. The third line defense being the adaptive. And that's kind of similar how the pathogen would go through the body. You have the first line responding first and if things are settled you'll stay there and if not you'll escalate the second line and so on the first line is basically the physical chemical and the biological barriers that we have things like the skin earwax defenses stomach acid our normal flora etc there's also a chart on the side highlighting our table actually sorry has all the different kind of a breakdown a nice chart for you guys to see all this information. The second line involves inflammation, fever, complement, interferon, phagocytosis, and natural ketocytes, and we'll discuss each of these. So let's talk about each of these barriers. So the physical barriers involve the skin, and of course the skin is an excellent barrier. It basically protects us from many, many organisms. A good example to remember is even with all the immune system intact, if you have a burn victim, they can typically die from infection simply because they've lost a good chunk of their skin, despite the fact that every other part of their body is still intact. Mucous membranes also trap organisms, that's what mucus is for, it just basically fixates doesn't allow to move respiratory tract you know have cilia hair mucus all that trap same thing you know urinary tract with the constant flushing of urine it actually helps with moving organisms away from the you know kidneys and so on so the physical areas are so important um in going back to skin a little bit again the skin is basically in that in its natural state with the exception of things like parasites, which some of them can actually break the intact skin. Organisms typically cannot break the intact skin, so they would need a cut or wound or something to gain access. The chemical barriers, which is part of the first line of defense, constitute things like our pH in different parts of the body, our skin, stomach, and the vaginal tract, for example, or acidic. Different levels of acidity, but they're all acidic and that's predominantly to discourage bacterial growth. As you know from last semester and the bacterial physiology lecture bacteria does not like acidic environments prefer pH closer to 8 and so by naturally many of our environments are inhibitory to bacterial growth also our many molecules are secreted as part of the first line of defense a lot of micro sedal molecules like lysozyne which breaks down the peptocolligan layer, defensins, calvacidins, RNAs and DNAs which break down you know genomes and even salt in itself can dry out the cells and take water from inside of a biosmosis and all these can be very inhibitory to microbial growth and our microbiome serves as an excellent defense and inhibits other organisms from growing whether it's bacterial or fungal and you know people have been talking and discovering how important the microbiome and the balance in the microbiome and many different diseases so you know previously we used to think because it's good for natural health and now we realize it's important for you gut health and there's a lot of relationships now between disturbance to the microbiome and you know neurologic diseases like parkinson's disease and others so the more and more we understand about our biological defense the many bacterium that reside in the yeast that reside in our body the more we appreciate that before the second line consists of inflammation fever, the interferon response, the component response, phagocytosis, and the role of natural kills. And next we'll discuss all of these. Let's talk about inflammation, a very important response which actually clues the body that there's something going on. So inflammation is very necessary. It's response to tissue damage, any kind of tissue damage, physical, infectious, anything else. The hallmark of inflammation or what triggers inflammation is the release of the inflammatory mediators or chemicals such as, as you already know, histamine, complement protein C5A, and two endocrosis factor alpha. These are just a few, as you know, there's tons of other inflammatory chemicals and cytokines that are there. How the inflammatory response is triggered, we'll talk about that in a little bit, but these chemicals are essential for that. And, you know, as you already know, the cardinal signs for inflammation are heat, pain, redness, and swelling, and the fifth one is loss of function. The terminology for those came from the Latin words calor, dolor, reborn, and tumor. And very important to remember that the inflammatory response in our body is coordinated by macrophages. So macrophages regulate the inflammatory response and that's very essential to understand. They're the one that started it. They're the one that invite other cells through the release of different chemicals like TNF-alpha. What happens when the inflammation starts is you see increase in blood supply into the area, you see increase in capillary permeability, all important to invite different players to come to this region. You also see increase in leukocyte, white blood cell chemotaxis, so attraction of specific cells to an area and what cells are attracted is typically determined by the type of chemokine receptors that are there and we'll discuss that a little bit and if we get fast clearance of the foreign substance or the antigen then that's basically an acute form of inflammation and things are resolved but sometimes as you know antigens persist and that results in a chronic instinctive inflammation, which tend to be a little more damaging, obviously, than acute. On the table right here, it shows you the migration per day and the quantity of these cells as inflammation starts. Of course, initially, neutrophils arrive, usually a set of inflammatory response, and then after that, different type of mononuclear cells like microfluidus or monocytes can come to the site then if that doesn't get resolved especially if they made a new response does not resolve you end up recruiting t helper cells which then can activate the humoral or the cell mediated in your response keep in mind that remember macrophages are the regulators of inflammation so they're always you know macrophages are resident monocytes so in any tissue there's already macrophages and more of them may be recruited but they'll always be there initially so they may invite neutrophils and they may invite more macrophages or they invite t helper cells but they're always there in that tissue one of the key cytokines that involve inflammation of course tnf alpha is one of the major ones truly plays a very important role. Allios 1 is also another one and interferon gamma. So typically most of these cytokines are released from white blood cells in response to activation and signal transduction pathways. Signals transduction pathways that are controlled by a transcription regulator referred to as NF-kappa B. A very important master switch basically with the immune response and critical to understand how its role in activation of different elements of the immune response. Just a few comments about TNF-alpha and it's role again the major major player in the inflammatory response it can be it's actually pro thrombotic it promotes leukocyte adhesion and migration it activates macrophages and so it's actually released by macrophages and activate macrophages it's kind of a positive feedback loop and it will promote hematopoiesis as well as lymphocyte development There are four major types of what's referred to as plasma enzyme systems which all contribute to different inflammatory mediators. So all these systems you see right here, the complement system, the kinin system, the flabolitic or plasmin system, and the clotting system, all release chemicals which actually can cause inflammation. So they all contribute to the many different inflammatory remediators that we secrete in our body. And it's important to have redundancy in that system in case something fails. We can always spot and trigger an inflammatory response. So we'll talk about each of these a little bit. So quickly discussing the plasmin system. It's basically a system that's involved predominantly in tissue repair and remodeling. Plasmin is an enzyme that actually dissolves fibrin after the production of a blood clot. plasminogen is converted to plasmin and then plasmin destroys fiber. You know the system also activates like matrix metallopodiases which are responsible for remodeling collagen so they're part of the healing process and they also promote the production of no red blood cells which is referred to as angiogenesis. So this system is crucial in repair and remodeling. The kinase system is actually integral to inflammation and especially in regard to the production of the chemical bradykinin. So bradykinin is an inflammatory mediator, a powerful inflammatory mediator, which has multiple different actions like smooth muscle contraction, it can increase vasculoperability, it can cause dilation because of the release of nitric oxide, which is a vasodilator. So But there are again other mediators that are also very important as part of the inflammatory response, as we have discussed. You know, leukotrienes and prostaglandins, very important. Complement proteins, C3A and C5A, all trigger mast cell degranulation, and we'll talk a little bit about mast cells and their role. IgE antibodies synthesize mast cells and basophils and cause both of them to produce histamine which is also an inflammatory mediator. On the right side there there's a youtube video that I cannot play within the video guys because of copyright reasons but you can go ahead and play it off the powerpoint and what that's going to show you is how a mast cell actually degranulates and responds to let's say IgE and how it actually dumps all these granulocytes in the cytoplasm that contain histamine. So it's just cool to see that mast cell completely disintegrating and basically just produces massive amount of histamine in the vicinity whenever it's activated. And so of course, so these cells, mast cells and vasophils play a very important role in the inflammatory response predominantly through the secretion of histamine. But they also produce serotonin, which is a vasodilator and helps with the increase of vasculopirability and can cause of course pain which then can alert the person that there's some things going on. And this is just a table to show you the many different types of inflammatory mediators that we talked about from histamine, the complement proteins, bradykinin, leukotrienes, prostaglandins and their main source what cells make them and their actions. It's a pretty good table just to kind of get an idea of where all these things come from and their locations. I I don't expect you to memorize, of course, all of this, but just to kind of get a grasp and understanding and appreciation to all these inflammatory mediators. One of the most crucial things for the body and the immune system basically is to recognize when there's a foreign substance. And the way to figure out or the solution for that is to actually have what's called pattern recognition receptors which are specific for foreign substances and not not our own antigens but at the same time broad enough to cover as many foreign substances as possible. It's kind of a difficult thing to do but apparently the body was able to figure that out using these PRRs. So pattern recognition receptors are crucial. They actually are found all over the body which is good on many different cells. What they do is they recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns or PAMPs and basically these are foreign antigens that are found on different foreign substances which the pattern recondition receptors can recognize. Make sure you're aware of these terminology both. So examples of these, these receptors can be um classic receptors that ones we found we find on cells surfaces for example like toll-like receptors which we're going to talk about those but some of those are actually secreted receptors that are found in serum like c-reactive protein or the manan binding lectin which is also important for triggering complement and some of them are found inside the cell. So intracytoplasmic -like nod-like receptors would be examples of that and we'll talk about those. Nod-like receptors are basically the name comes from nucleotide binding oligomization domain because these receptors bind the same type of nucleotide over and over. So again, they bind to these pathogen -associated molecular patterns, like things like peptidoglycan, which is found on most bacteria, because they have a cell wall, or LPS, which is found on gram negatives, or let's say single-stranded RNA molecules that are found in viruses, okay? These are coded by our genome. These receptors do not undergo rearrangement. They don't differ from one individual to another among all human beings. These are identical and as such allow all of us the ability to recognize these foreign substances and as such then trigger the inflammatory response. So what do the pattern recognition receptors do? Of course, as we talk, they trigger the inflammation. The inflammatory response is very important and let the body know that something was wrong. So they channel all these systems and they It can also mobilize the infectious microbe to prevent it from moving into other places in the body. They can promote phycocytosis, and they can actually activate our cells to produce antimicrobial substances. On the right side, this table shows the pattern recognition receptor signaling pathway. Just it's a complex figure to look at, but it's kind of interesting to see different types of pattern recognition receptors and the different type of PAMPs that they bind to and how they relay that information to cells. Just look at it, take it, so give you an appreciation of how that works. The point here is not for you to memorize any of this, but at least maybe sometime when you visually see something it will remind you of these things later. The next few slides we're going to discuss a few pattern recognition receptors, let's talk about a little bit, at least key ones. One of the pretty important ones is C -reactive protein, or CRP. It's a very important protein, it's a main acute phase protein produced by actually parasites, or liver cells, in response to very important cytokine IL-6, which is an inflammatory cytokine. The both importance of CRP and IL-6 inflammation is definitely understated. I'm not sure if you guys have been reading recently about information, but one of the key things to figure out if a COVID patient will progress into a severe case is to measure IL-6. So IL-6 is quite an an important determinant in figuring out if a COVID patient would become more severe case. And also C-reactive proteins on both of these. So IL-6 levels should be around like three milligrams per mil, but in some patients it could go all the way up to 200, 300, even a thousand. And that of course suggests a very severe infection and quicker intervention and probably poor prognosis too. but again these markers are important and there's also i believe an il-6 receptor i'm sorry i have six blocker a drug i can't remember which kind of like it's one of those monoclonal antibodies but you can look it up and it's been suggested to be used as therapy for for severe cases of covet um going back to what we're talking about here c-reactive protein the importance of your active protein as a pan recognition receptor it's part of what's called the pentexin, pentexin family of proteins. They call them that because they have five subjects for penta, penta5, that form this ring. C-reactive protein pro -opsonizes microbes. It's basically tags in, you know, microbes like nomococci, which have capsules, so they can be then destroyed by phagocytes and all recognized by a complement. And so those will do that. And so CRP will also activate the classical complement pathway and it can also even bind to necrotic and apoptotic cells and cause them to be cleared from our body so it's a pretty important protein and again very important marker of inflammation and i'll give you an example of covet patients but also in like heart disease and other and other infections in the last pattern recognition receptors we're going to talk about what are very important ones and probably one of the first discovered pattern recognition receptors. This is when people realize there's such a thing as a pattern recognition receptor and this is how we actually trigger inflammation in our body and that is toll-like receptors. They call them toll-like because they are toll receptors in E. coli and these toll-like receptors seem to share homology with these E. coli receptors. That's where the name comes from. It's not hugely important. Again toll-like receptors are there's at least 10 of them and they're found in most tissues in the body. They can activate tycosides, which then can come and of course become antigen -presenting cells to eventually trigger the adaptive in response. They can activate the transcription factor NF-kappa-B that we talked about earlier in the lecture. That's a very important signal transduction pathways of inflammation. And on the table right here shows you different types of toll-like receptors and the type of PAMPs they bind to. So like total lycoceptor 1 is specific to lipopeptides or LPS, so it's pretty much detects gram -negative bacteria. Total lycoceptor 3 is specific to double-stranded RNA. So of course we don't have double -stranded RNA in our cells. This is typically a viral species or viral molecule. So total lycoceptor 3 is very specific to recognizing viruses in the body. Toll-like receptor 4, LPS, so gram-negatives, and so on. As you can see, you know, Toll-like receptor 7 and 8, which also recognize single-strand RNA, detect virions. You know, and people have seen, actually, deficiencies of Toll-like receptors, for example, it seems that deficiency in Toll -like receptor 3 makes people more susceptible to hepatitis, sorry, ****** simplex virus, SSV. Total lycra receptor 7 seem to be associated, or deficiency in total lycra receptor 7 seem to be associated with higher viral load and disease progression in HIV patients. So these, the presence of these receptors and having them be intact is important. it. So let's talk about fever as part of the innate immune response. A second line of difference. We discovered inflammation. So fever is typically induced by what's called either exogenous substances like LPS or endogenous cytokines that are in our body. Both fever-inducing substances are referred to as pyrogens. That's what that term means. So LPS would be an exogenous pyrogen, while IL-1, IL-6 are endogenous pyrogens. Either way, what's the purpose and the benefit of fever? Many actually, and remember the definition of fever is you have to have anywhere above 38 almost degrees Celsius to be considered fever. so mild fluctuation in temperature around 37 degrees celsius is not really fever. Either way the rise in temperature in our body actually inhibits the multiplication of a lot of microbes that especially bacteria that do not like that higher end temperature so so it inhibits their growth. It can actually impede nutrition of bacteria by reducing the amount of iron in our body and it can increase the metabolism of our own enzymes and stimulate immune reactions and some of the naturally protective physiological processes that we have. So fever, as long as it's controlled and within reason, is very beneficial in fighting a pathogen. Part of the second line is a very important group of molecules known as interferons. Of course, this COVID pandemic has really shed a light on the significance and important an interferon and I'll talk to you about that a little bit. So interferons is a group of proteins. There's actually three major types of interferon. Actually there's two types of interferons, type 1 and type 2. Type 1 interferons are the alpha and beta which are the antiviral interferons and then there's the type 2 which is the interferon gamma which is more of a immune regulator. So Let's focus on the type one interferon, which is the alpha and beta. Alpha is made by dendritic cells, while beta is made by fibroblasts, but they both have antiviral properties. Typically, what they do is they block the mRNA synthesis of the virus and activate apoptosis of the cell, thereby killing the cell that the virus is infected. There's been a significant amount of information recently talking about the role of interferon alpha and the level of interferon alpha in patients that have COVID. So the higher interferon alpha, the better the outcomes. And also this also explains why children don't seem to have severe COVID is because they normally have a high level of interferon alpha. Children in general don't have a very well adaptive immune response. Usually it ticks that will become teenagers were to fully develop so they rely more on the innate immunity. And relying more on innate immunity is not a bad thing because you can block the virus to start with before things get out of hand. So there's been several articles that talks about the level of Enderfuran Alpha and its relationship to the severity of COVID. So again really important the stuff we're talking about here and quite timely and significant. On the other hand, interferon gamma is a is a very important regulatory molecule. It can actually regulate and induce MHC molecules and enhance co-stimulatory molecules in antigen -presenting cells. It can induce like adhesion and chemokines on antithelial cells. So it just plays many different roles in regulating the immune response. It could even activate macrophages and make them more microcedal. It can promote class switching by antibodies, sorry, by B cells to switch antibodies. It can actually play a big role in regulating TH1 and TH2 population because interferon gamma favors the TH1 response, which we'll talk about in the next lecture, which is the adaptive beam response. But this again where the innate immune response and the adaptive immune response interplay. and interferon gamma is one of those in the next few slides we're going to be discussing the system known as complement which is an integral part of the innate second-level defense so complement the name actually comes from because it complements the immune system when people discovered it that's where it came from it's basically a group of like 16 proteins that are found in serum all produced by liver cells so that's important then the function of liver, they actually make up almost 10 percent of serum proteins. They are made inactive, so the complement proteins, excuse me, are made and they're inactive in the serum, but then they're inactivated on the spot. It's probably one of the older systems, you know, from evolution in that sense. And there are three different ways to activate complement in the body. They were, the discovery, the way it's listed there, A, B, and C, is listed by discovery. People discovered the classical pathway first, and the alternative pathway, and then the menand-binding mectin. But that's not how they are actually activated in real life. So let's just talk about each briefly, and the function of complement next few slides, and then discuss this so the classical pathway from the name they referred to it that way because that's the common way over the the first time that you know compliment was activated and that's typically occurs by the presence of antigens and antibodies whenever we have an antigen antibody binds to it these two combination of two with those complexes can actually activate the classical pathway. Clearly, if you have to have an antibody, that means you've already activated T helper cells, probably TH17 or TH2, and then you've made antibodies, you know, sorry, then activated B cells to became plasma cells to make antibodies. So that's a long process and that's clearly takes more to activate complement hours. You have to have the adaptive immune response fully activated um to activate the classical pathway so it's actually the the pathway that activates the latest on the other hand the alternative pathway is the one that's activated first the alternative pathway is actually has a very mild it's almost like it's constantly on a low level of activation very low level and it's immediately like triggered to go all the way up The alternative pathway is activated by microbial products like LPS or peptidoglycan. If you add those things in blood or serum, it will activate the alternative pathway. And then there's the manan-binding lectin pathway. And that's actually activated by manan, which is a sugar that's found on some bacterial cells. And so that's also a quick pathway that's also activated early on in the process. So the classical tends to be the latest. Either way, the complement cascade, guys, reminds me a lot of the cloud and cascade. They're very similar in both of them. They both work on positive feedback. They both have a common pathway. Eventually, everything funnels the same thing. They all have multiple ways by which you can activate them. So either way, classical, alternative, or man-man, eventually results in the activation of C3 protein, or complement 3 protein, and that breaks apart into C3B and C3A. C3A, as we talked already, is an inflammatory chemical, so that can serve as that purpose. Now, the C3B goes on and activates C5. Now, C5 becomes C5A and C5B. C5A is an inflammatory chemical again. C5b goes on and activates what's called the membrane attack complex, which is a combination of C5b, C6, C7, C8, and C9. And then we'll talk about what happens with the membrane attack complex and what's achieved after that. So that's typically how the complement system is activated, but we'll discuss the rest in the next few slides. So here let's talk a little bit about complement function. What does complement do? So complement has multiple functions as you can see here, five different essential functions but the really the most important one and the most unique one to complement is obstinization the reason i say that is because all the other four functions are redundant function two three four or five on this slide are redundant with other things in other words you can have other components of the immune system chipping in or compensating for lack of complement but the obstinization tends to be an issue so if complement is deficient then obstinization ends up being a problem so again we talked about obstinization before it's a key process basically it's tagging foreign substances for destruction predominantly the most effective way for complement to obstinize is capsulated bacteria so while capsules are very difficult to process very difficult like we talked about last semester in the bacterial physiology lecture. They're difficult to clear, they survive longer, they can avoid antibodies and so on. So opsonizing a capsule is critical to greater capsulated organisms. So whenever we see complement deficiency, the first thing we notice is a patient becomes highly susceptible to capsulated bacteria. So capsulization is actually done by C3B and C4B, these two complement components that are important. But does complement have other functions? Sure, Like number two, formation of the membrane attack complex, which we just discussed in the previous slide, or MAC, and that is the combination of C5B, C6, C7, C8, and C9. All these form a hole in the cell membrane of, let's say, bacteria or envelope viruses and pokes hole in them. So it's basically you're poking hole in the cell or the viral envelope and you both lose the integrity. So that's an important function, but that can be also performed by other parts of the system. For example, you know, T-cellotoxic cells can do that. Microphages can live and kill bacteria, neutrophils. Also, we just talked about that several times now, the byproducts of the activation of C3 and C5 results in C3A and C5A. Both are inflammatory chemicals and mediators that can do all the inflammation that we talked about before. Also, complements need to help with priming B cells and provide us with a much more efficient antibody response. They can also help clear immune complexes in the body and cells that are destined to die. So to highlight the importance of complement in opsonization, a lot of experiments were done on depleting, for example, mice from complement and seeing how they respond, specifically complement C30s. If you do that for mice, for example, C depleted mice or C deficient mice seem to have a much lower antibody response. Now granted, mice immune responses are different from humans, but nevertheless we can still learn a lot from them. You know, C opsonized particles, so particles that are opsonized by complement tend to be a thousand times more active at triggering antibodies production and be cleared than unopsonized particles so clearly complement aids the immoral immune response which is of course the antibody response. C3V seems to have many functions like helping with B cell maturation and migration to actually avoid organs activating B cells by helping the mind to be opsonized and promoting oxidized antigens and helping dendritic cells to select for the correct B cell that they activate. Dendritic cells, if you remember, are very important antigen -presenting cells, like follicle dendritic cells. And like we talked about, complement can be activated by the classical pathway or the lectin pathway or the alternative pathway. So again, with the classical pathway, just to reiterate, you have to have an antigen antibody. Typically, the antibody is either RGM or IgG. IgM is much more efficient at activating complement because of its pentameric structure. If you remember, it's got a large structure, it can activate a lot more complement than IgE, for example. And it kind of makes sense because it's one of the first antibody response. For lectin, as we talked about, presence of manan or mannose, for example, can activate the manan -lectic pathway. It's that carbohydrate and components of the cell wall like the n-acetylcocosamine. We mentioned a little bit the alternative pathway is usually under a very low constant state of activation, so it's always ready and it's always the first one. Typically required magnesium, a factor called B, all important ones, and it's usually activated by surface foreign substances like LPS. This table kind of helps you summarize like, for example, the role of different microbes, the role of immunoglobulins and activating pathways. For example, the classical pathway immune complex is having IgM and different subtypes where you can activate them. and so on and for example different type of organisms that are microorganisms that can activate complement so this is showing you the the full pathway of complement again no need to memorize this that's not the point but just to see how the different points where the activating things happens, for example the classical, the alternative and the lexin, and how they all funnel to the C3, which then becomes splits to C3A and C3B, and then C3B converts C5 to C5A and C5B, and then that goes on activates the membrane attack complex. This slide shows the membrane attack complex. On the right side there you see an electron micrograph of the membrane attack complex embedded into the membrane of a bacterium. These holes are basically the membrane attack complex basically forming these complexes and of course this causes the membrane to leak and the cells to lose integrity and eventually they're lice. This table presents the different complement deficiencies. You'll also have lectures on complement deficiencies from some of our clinical faculty so this will help you at least have a basis for that. So you can see different comparable deficiencies that can happen along the way and the consequence of that. So, for example, deficiencies in preparidin, P on the right bottom side there, can predispose people to meningococcal meningitis. Preparidin deficiency, for example, is an x-linked deficiency that's inherited that way and males are of course more predisposed to that. But if you look at in general, no matter where deficiencies, deficiencies in C5, deficiencies in factor D, but they all basically result in severe recurrent bacteria infections and more often capsulated bacteria, capsulated bacteria. And again, that goes back to the importance of obstinization for complement. Also, you'll see some in other places there talks about like lupus -like disease sometimes in activity a deficiency can cause that there's also polymorphisms and C3 protein that can results let's say in macular degeneration so complement seem to play a lot of different roles so the question arises how do we protect our own cells from complement once it becomes active and how do we also protect complement proteins from being consumed and degraded and basically use them so there's actually several mechanisms that are deployed by the body to protect complement to protect ourselves from complement and protect also complement components so there are systems that prevent consumption of the complement components for example if you see on this table there are several like decay accelerating factors CD55 basically delays complement from being used and defaults into stopping, for example, MAC formation, you know, in that way you can, unless it actually finds a membrane of a foreign substance. Looking at, for example, membrane cofactor protein CD46, that actually protects our own membranes from complement. There's also another one called CD59, which we'll discuss on the next slide. That also protects our own, it's found on receptors of our own cells, and it protects our own membranes from activation. And so these actually, these existing um substances both protect from being consumed and protect us from being attacked by here is the cd59 that we're talking about and this complement component is important and it's found in a lot of our cells as broadly expects throughout tissues in the body it inhibits actually the binding of c9 and without c9 you cannot form the mac if you remember mac is c5b C6, C7, C8, and C9. And C9 is the major component here, and so without that you cannot form MAC. And this is kind of illustrated with people that have actually deficiencies in expression of CD59. These individuals develop what's called proxysmal nocturnum hemoglobinuria, and the reason it's named that way is because, you know, over time when they wake up in the morning their urine becomes black because as they sleep breakdown of the blood cells accelerates and it just accumulates so sometimes confused a lot with like hemolytic anemia pancycopenia and so on it makes it so much similar to that so it's kind of difficult sometimes to diagnose let's switch topics and talk about how phycocytes arrive at the site of inflammation how do they get to the site, how do they leave the bloodstream and arrive at the actual tissue, and how do they get to exactly where the antigen is and how I'm in on that location. Several things are at play here. Phagocytes first follow a chemokine gradient, so the more there are chemokines, the more they'll chase that. It's basically concentration dependent. There's over 50 different kind of chemokines and they can be secreted in different concentrations. Phagocytes have chemokine receptors that allow them to interact with these chemokines, and then they basically follow that gradient to get to exactly where the antigen is. But of course before that they have to leave the circulation, and to do that they use their integrins, surface receptors, cell surface receptors or CAMs, and integrins basically then bind to selectives, and selectives are also receptors that are found on the endothelial cells, the squamous cells of the blood vessels. uh once the civic integrand binds that specific selectin they will um excuse me bind to the wall of the etothenium roll the cell will roll and then find the space between two squamous cells and then by a process called diacodesis they'll squeeze in between and then keep continuing to following that chemokine gradient until they get to the exact location of that foreign substances which then they can you know put those more cytokines and or phagocytide to sell whatever they need to do to deal with that foreign substance here's an example of different type of chemokines and their receptors and you can see here so there's you know there's again we talked about there's at least 50 different kind of chemokines and the receptors are called so the chemokines are CC you know chemokine chemicals and their receptors are called CCRs you know so like CCR5 and CXCR3 are are both chemokine receptors and if those seem to ring a bell these are also two receptors that HIV binds to to actually gain entry into both macrophages and T helper cells so so take note of that. And yeah, so the variation of these different receptors and ligands as a result can determine which leukocytes get to which tissue. That's how you can get that selectivity. Now of course there are defects in sometimes in these particular receptors and when that happens you end up with inefficiency and inability to hone these leukocytes to a certain location and subsequently, for example, you can't get rid of infections, foreign substances. So one example of that is locus side adhesion deficiency syndrome or LAD syndrome. And that's really a defect in the production of the receptors, you know, called beta integrins, which we just talked about. They bind to the selectors of the therial ones. LAD patients typically suffer from life -threatening both bacterial and fungal infections and cannot actually form abscesses. so they cannot like you know basically deal and kill a foreign substance so the neutrophils don't really work very well at the same time this knowledge can give us some applications for example you can use monoclonal antibodies against specific ligands like let's say v-cams and block them. So, for example, in multiple sclerosis patients where the, where our immune system cells, specifically T -cells, attack the myelin, you can prevent these T-cells from migrating this into the nervous system by simply blocking the ligand on, let's say, the oligodendrocytes and then subsequently the T-cells will just simply not migrate there. So, it's kind of a really neat way of since you know that this is the cause so these could be like therapeutic applications obviously these are not available yet but hopefully they show a lot of promise so we spoke about we spoke about phycocytosis phycocyte chemotaxis so let's switch and talk about the actual process of phycocytosis phycocytosis part of the innate immune response is it's part of the second line along with inflammation along with complement and other systems we talked about, thagocytes is critically important. Thagocytes, as you can see from the figure on top there, top left, express many different receptors, toll-like receptors, you know, FCR receptors, these are for antibodies, complement receptors, receptors for defensins, like those molecules that are produced, and so on. So there's many, many receptors. They use these receptors to bind to different molecules and they also combine and also recognize pathogens. And so that's the first key step is first to attach, you know, to the receptor. And then second is to recognize whether this substance you bind to, do you want to... is it the foreign or is it self? So that's very important. Typically our cells produce like molecules called CD47s and these molecules tell a phagocyte that we are self-antigens so you don't have to destroy us and so after that step the phagocyte basically will let go of that particular cell. If that cell is getting old and dying sometimes they don't express as many of these CD47s and subsequently the phagocyte will destroy itself and that's a good thing because these cells are actually dying anyway and need to be cleared. Again so if it's a dying cell or if it's a pathogen then the phagocyte will recognize there's something to destroy and then they will start engulfing it. Of course using axiom polymerization they'll form a phagosome and then once the phagosome is inside the cell they'll fuse it with light zones. Of course light zones have digestive enzymes and other degradative substances. A drop of pH takes place here and as a result the enzymes become active and you form what's called a phagolysosome and the phagolysosome becomes active and you digest the substance and eventually hopefully you expel the debris from breaking down or in the case of like macrophages or dendritic cells which are also dendritic cells they can present those pieces of the pathogen on the surface on MHC class tools, right, for antigen presentation. And we'll discuss antigen presentation in the, we've discussed it last semester, a part of the, that immunity, but we'll discuss it also this time. So again, a very important process, just recognize that a lot of pathogens have evolved different ways to avoid phagocytosis, like we've talked about how capsules are difficult to for the phagocytes to attach and recognize but there's other pathogens that have evolved ways for example some pathogens prevent the phagosome from the lysone to fuse or when they do fuse they prevent the pH from drop or sometimes they'll escape the phagosome and so on so so far we've kind of talked about how phagocytes can recognize mainly extracellular pathogens like a bacterium. What happens if the pathogen is intracellular? How is that recognized? So there's actually silozoic receptors specifically designed to recognize intracellular pathogens. These are part of the pattern recognition receptors that we discussed before. And so we talked about pattern recognition receptors, we talked about toll-like receptors, c-reactive protein and so on, but these are also very important and they're recognized in the cellular pattern. Examples of those receptors are nod-like receptors. For example, nod-like receptors recognize peptoclican, let's say chunks of it, with noic acid-inducible gene 1-like helicases. These specific receptors, I know it's a wrong and earful, recognize double -strand RNA. And so there are many ways to also recognize, and that's crucial to that. Nod-like receptors actually form part of what's called the inflammasome so they can trigger inflammation and cell death in the actual cell that's infected by the pathogen. So these are important, they play a very important role. For example, Nod polymorphisms have been found among individuals and peoples and they've noticed that if people have these mutations they can be let's say more higher risk of Crohn disease more bacterial infections and they can have a little more IgE which can trigger more allergies they are more prone to eczemas and even eczemas so it's kind of an interesting clinical associations with these receptors and their role so you we have talked about different types of phagocytes and histology and so on so it's kind of a review but it's an important review for you to remember that you know phagocytes are mainly divided into two major types polymorphonuclear cells and mononuclear cells there's also another terminology and they're both equally important polymorphonuclear cells are also called granulocytes and mononuclear cells are called agranulocytes and the combination of terminology actually helps identify these cells. So polymorphonuclear cells or granulocytes have a polymorphic nucleus. They have one nuclei but it's shaped weird and that's how you can tell them. But they also are granulocytes which means they have granules in their cytoplasm. If the granules don't show up with the HME stain, in other words to stain neutrally those are called neutrophils from neutral granules if they're stains with eosin which is usually pink the granules those are called eosinophils and if the stains are stained with hematoxalan which is the blue dye which is also basic they're called basophils so that's where the terms neutrophils eosinophils or basophils come from is actually from the type of reaction with the stain. Mononuclear cells, mononucleus, they simply have a regular size nucleus, just kind of nice and spherical, usually large, but they're also called agranulocytes because they don't have any granules in the cytoplasm. And those would be your monocytes, macrophages, of course they're monocytes when they're in circulation, macrophages when they're in tissue, dendritic cells, now osteoclasties are all part of the malnuclear cells and things like microglia which are also type of macrophages here on the right side shows the kind of precursor and how you form different macrophages and andritic cells they all originate from one main cell originally in bone marrow and differentiate into different types of cells on the on the bottom right side that red picture with the green that's actually an eosinophil kind of a really neat thing was so you can see the eosinophil nuclei stay in red and the cytoplasm stay in green, the fluorescence stain. But what you're seeing is what eosinophils kind of do is they actually fling their DNA from their cell. They just like fling it out and use it to trap worms. Because remember eosinophils are anti -worm and they're very effective at doing that. So they use the DNA kind of like to trap the worms and the worms can't move much because DNA is very sticky. It's almost like throwing glue on an animal. And this particular slide just shows you a different population of macrophages found all over the body. You are almost familiar with a lot of these different names. For example, in the liver, we call them kufra cells. In the lungs, they're called alveolar macrophages. Sometimes they're called bust cells. In the skin, we call them length of hand cells. In the central nervous system we call microglia but these are all basically macrophages nothing new and it's just a list for you don't need to memorize that but as you encounter these different cells you just remember that these are all macrophages this slide shows a comparison between the two major fagocytes that we all talk about neutrophils and macrophages so it's important to kind of i think you already know a lot of these so let's just put them in one place for example for neutrophils they're short -lived they're involved in the acute response so they're Typically, the first thymicocytes arrive at a site of an inflammation. They're really responsible for fast clearance of the pathogen. They have tons of antimicrobial peptides, lots of defencins and so on that they can use on pathogens, and they can also produce oxygen radicals to kill the pathogen. That's it in regard to neutrophils. For macrophages, they're long-lived, and so they're really more so involved in chronic inflammation infection. Remember, macrophages also regulate the inflammatory response, and they're the ones that invite neutrophils. They're not as micro-racidal and as cytotoxic as neutrophils. Neutrophils are just a lot more notorious. But, you know, as long as they, the longer they stay there, they can actually accumulate that toxicity. As we talked about, they recruit neutrophils. They require activation by pattern recognition receptors, and they actually display a little higher degree of specificity which makes them better as sentinels of the immune system like dendritic cells and again that specificity is still broad because remember they're still part of the innate immune response and as typical of all white blood cells they all produce cytokines this is just a slide that shows the main cytokines that phagocytes produce. For example, interleukin -1, which causes fever, it's a pyrogen. TNF-alpha, major the producer of inflammation, which is secreted by macrophages, and other interleukins like IL-8, IL-12, which are raw and attractive, like neutrophils and natural fuel cells. On the right side there shows, again, a comparing contrast between two major monoclear cells, which are enderitic cells and macrophages. Again, the enderitic cells are really predominantly for antigen presentation, especially to naive T cells. They're also involved in educating T cells, so differentiation of different type of T cells, while macrophages are the one really more into, you know, regulation of the inflammatory response, actual killing of the pathogen, but they can also do presentation. We have discussed this before, we discussed the process of phagocytosis and that some microbes use different mechanisms to evade phagocytosis like capsules. We talked about that. The pathogen M. tuberculosis habits phagolysosome fusion. This is why tuberculosis or the pathogen can stay in the body for a very long period of time and why it can reactivate down years years down the road by basically hiding inside macrophages typically in the phagolytosome or at least sorry in the phagosome which is also why it takes so long to treat TB is to get rid of all these you know M. tuberculosis bacteria or bacilli that are sitting inside those. L monocyte genes can actually escape the phagosome prior to the phagolytosome fusing and the inside genes makes a hemolycin called the stereolysin which can poke hole in the phagosome membrane and escape it. Also in response to this macrophages can actually stimulate their own self-destruction basically it's called autophagy and so that's basically in response to let's say if M tuberculosis continue to stay inside the macrophage the macrophage cannot clear it The macrophage then stimulates its own degradation with the purpose of getting rid itself of the pathogen. So you'll see that in a lot of chronic bacterial infections because chronic bacteria basically reside in these monocytes for an extended period of time. And that's one of the mechanisms to get rid of it. Disregulation of autophagy will result in prolonged inflammation and delayed clearance of this pathogen. And then just talk a little bit about different types of macrophages. So predominantly macrophages fall into two different lineages, M1 and M2, and there's a distinct difference between these two macrophages. M1 tend to be more inflammatory, M1 macrophages they tend to respond to interferon gamma, they tend to kill more and that's really more if so inflammatory microcedal type of um microphage while the m2 are more into repair they're less microcedal they're not as inflammatory in that regard and so so sometimes microbes can exploit so you know like so like francisella tolerances will will cause my microphages to shift more to the m2 type so they're not as microcedal But they both are important in the body, so what you want to do is start out maybe with M1 types and kill the pathogen and all that, but then eventually you want to switch more to an M2 because at some point you want to resolve that, or at least once the microbes are killed, you don't want to just keep killing tissue and causing more damage, and now you still want to induce repair. So you should see a shift from M1 to M2. but you don't want to start with an m2 because then you're not going to get clearance of that pathogen just flushing out a little bit the macrophage regulation we can see here both the pro-inflammatory m1 macrophages are typically stimulated by interferon gamma which is also secreted by both macrophages themselves so it's kind of a positive feedback And additionally, my specialty T -helper-1 cells. So those are sometimes called classically activated, the M1s, macrophages, and they're pretty much involved in inflammation, you know, and killing of the antichocytosis of the cell, rather than healing and repair. DH-17 cells, or T -helper-17 cells, which we'll discuss later through their IL -17, can also cause macrophages to become more inflammatory in their reaction. On the other hand, Th2 cells or T helper 2 through IL -4 and IL-13 switch the phenotype of the macrophage into more of the wound healing type, basically what we refer to as M2 or alternatively activated sometimes they call. Either way a dysfunction of both of these can happen if the if m2 microphages are overexpressed you can get fibrosis because they can just cause a lot of healing too much basically and of course m1 can cause too much damage through inflammation. So let's switch and talk about the last innate cells referred to as natural killer cells. Again very important cells lymphocytes if you remember with lymphocytes there's t cells b cells and natural kill cells they're the least dominant of the kill of the lymphocytes these cells are most common than B cells and then natural kill cells composed probably like one to three percent of all lymphocytes but they are very very important cells they can innately engage antigen they don't have memory but they can recognize both vital infected cells and tumor cells and kill kill them on the spot how do they do that they have basically receptors referred to as killer activation receptors, CARs. And the counter to that, they also have what's called killer inhibition receptors, which those prevent them from killing our own cells. So usually if a virus infects a cell, these viruses will tend to, sorry, not the viruses, but the cells then tend to display with stress molecules or stress associated molecules called MYC-A and MICB and basically MIC or MIC stands for MHC class 1 polypeptide related sequence and so they'll display MCC class 1 related sequences which are showing that they have these stresses. At the same time viruses can cause the MHC class 1 to be depressed. That's kind of a mechanism that the viruses will do. Either way the natural kill cells will recognize these MICA and MICB through their cars and that result in death of that cell so once engagement happened natural kill cells can make also like perforans and granzymes which can kill either poke holes into the cell or cause it to undergo epoptosis well natural kill cells can you know the cure receptors will constantly go around and assess the MHC class 1 and if it's devoid of any foreign substance then they will just leave the cell B and this ensures that natural killer cells do not attack our own cells. The next few slides is going to just give you a little introduction to primary immune deficiencies. There's primary differences and secondary immune deficiencies and you guys will have actual lectures on each. I just want to give you just a little bit of a heads up basically before you start and to also allow you some clinical relevance the information we're talking about so everything we've talked about in regard to innate immune response we can have deficiencies in any of those and those can result in um obviously diseases for example defects in phagolyzone fusion occurs in Shidiak-Higashi syndrome which is a phagocyte disorder and of course these predispose these individuals to infections and chronic granulomatous disease and there's a defect in the ability of macrophages to actually produce oxygen radicals this predisposes these individuals for example to like fungal diseases like aspergulosis there are individuals with interferon gamma receptor deficiency and as you know interferon gamma is a very important cytokine especially with th1 and cell mediated immune response so that basically takes out their self -mediating response. And we talked today about LAD leukocyte adhesion deficiency and how that will prevent, for example, neutrophils and macrophages to reach the site of inflammation, which then predispose these individuals to infections. There's also complement disorders that can also predispose individuals to several infections. We've talked about those a little bit. Now, many of those predispose individuals to encapsulate the bacteria. So there's defects in alternative pathway and mendenlectin pathway, there's defects in classical pathway. So deficiencies in like C1, C2, and C4, and those like make immune complexes very difficult to clear, which results in more type 3 hypersensitivities. And we talked about deficiency in complement regulation with hereditary injury ***** because individuals don't express the protective complement component which then complement ends up lysing red blood cells overnight and resulting in that dark urine so anyway just a brief introduction you'll have actual lectures separate ones on primary immune deficiencies So with this lecture we focused predominantly on the innate immune response. We initially compared the innate and the adaptive a little bit and then we split the innate response into the primary or sorry first line of defense and second line of defense. First line of defense was like the physical chemical and biological barriers that we talked about and then we fleshed out the second line of defense as we talked about the inflammation, complement, phagocytosis, natural kill sub-response and all the other ones we discussed. And initially in the end we talked just briefly about a few phagocytes and complement deficiencies and the type of diseases they're associated with.