SOURCE: Lecture # 153. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of Anemias
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Following completion of the learning materials, students should be able to:
1. Identify the goals of therapy for the microcytic, normocytic, and megaloblastic
anemias covered in this presentation.
2. Relate the pharmacokinetic and biochemical properties of iron, folic acid and
vitamin B12 supplements to their effects on laboratory values in the
management of specific anemias.
3. Correlate the pharmacokinetic properties and mechanisms of the
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) to their effects on laboratory values in
the management of anemia of chronic kidney disease and chemotherapy-
induced anemia in selected cancer patients.
4. Relate the pharmacokinetic properties and mechanisms of hydroxyurea to its
effects in the management of sickle cell anemia.
5. Explain the side effects, adverse effects, cautions, contraindications, and drug
interactions of the various products in relation to their mechanisms and effects.
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• Practice Questions
Optional materials for acquiring new knowledge:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Notes handout  Guided Reading Questions
• ScholarRx Bricks and Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide.
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
• Practice questions: Active recall boosts long-term retention.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links to resources
ScholarRx Brick: Name of Discipline/ Organ System: Hematology
• Iron deficiency anemia: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/iron-deficiency-anemia
• Megaloblastic anemia: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/megaloblastic-anemia
• Sickle cell anemia: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/sickle-cell-disease
• Anemia Review: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/anemias-putting-it-all-together
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 33: Agents Used in Cytopenias;
Hematopoietic Growth Factors (relevant sections)
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281752393
LWW Health Library: Premium Basic Sciences; Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology: Chapter 44:
Drugs for Anemia https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253330632&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 13e, 2021; Chapter 33: Agents Used
for Cytopenias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=
285595479#1207302166 4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
ANEMIA: A significant deficit in the mass of circulating
oxygen-carrying red blood cells.
Features
• Hemoglobin level or hematocrit is more than
two standard deviations below the lower limit
of normal for age and gender.
• Erythropoietin levels are increased in direct
proportion to the severity of anemia.
• Some underproduction anemias are
associated with ineffective erythropoiesis.
• Management is directed at the cause.
Symptoms of anemia
• fatigue, pale skin, weakness, dizziness, and
shortness of breath
• headaches, heart palpitations, cold
hands/feet, and brittle nails.
https://www.lalpathlabs.com/blog/signs-symptoms-causes-and-treatment-of-anemia/
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Key points
Anemias are classified as:
• Microcytic hypochromic anemia, caused by iron deficiency, is the most common type of anemia.
• Normocytic, normochromic anemia is due to chronic inflammation, decreased erythropoietin
production (chronic kidney disease), acute blood loss, hemolysis, and others.
• Megaloblastic anemia is a subset of the macrocytic, normochromic anemia caused by a deficiency of
folic acid or vitamin B , cofactors required for the normal maturation of red blood cells.
12
• Pernicious anemia, the most common type of vitamin B deficiency anemia, is caused by an
12
autoimmune attack on gastric parietal cells and intrinsic factor, a protein required for efficient
absorption of dietary vitamin B , or by surgical removal of that part of the stomach that secretes
12
intrinsic factor.
• Erythropoietin, which is produced by the specialized cells of the kidney, activates receptors on
erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow, thereby stimulating the production of red cells and
increasing their release from the bone marrow.
• Recombinant erythropoiesis stimulating agents (ESAs) may be used for the treatment of symptomatic
anemia not responding to therapy for the underlying cause of the disease. The ESAs in use in the
U.S. are epoetin alfa, darbepoetin alfa, and methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta.
• The most common complications of ESA therapy are hypertension and thrombosis, leading to
myocardial infarction and stroke. Serum hemoglobin in patients treated with an ESA should not
exceed 10-11 g/dL because higher hemoglobin levels are associated with increased mortality and
cardiovascular adverse events.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Key points
• Sickle cell disease is a genetic cause of hemolytic anemia due to increased erythrocyte destruction.
• Patients with sickle cell disease are homozygous for the abnormal β-hemoglobin S (HbS) allele.
Deoxygenated HbS chains form polymeric structures that dramatically change erythrocyte shape
(sickle), reduce deformability, and elicit membrane permeability changes that promote hemoglobin
polymerization, eventually leading to veno-occlusive events causing pain and organ ischemia.
• The goal of therapy with disease modifying therapies for sickle cell anemia is to reduce the frequency
of painful veno-occlusive crises and the need for blood transfusions.
• Hydroxyurea is the first-line medication for treatment of sickle cell anemia. It is an antimetabolite that
selectively inhibits ribonucleoside reductase, preventing the conversion of ribonucleotides to
deoxyribonucleotides, halting the cell cycle at the G1 to S phase.
• In sickle cell anemia, hydroxyurea increases red blood cell (RBC) hemoglobin F levels, RBC water
content, deformability of sickled cells, and alters adhesion of RBCs to endothelium. It is generally well
tolerated but can cause myelosuppression, GI disturbance, and dermatologic reactions.
• Crizanlizumab or L-glutamine may be added to hydroxyurea therapy if pain episodes are still present
after 6 months or more. Crizanlizumab is an anti-P-selectin antibody that reduces interactions between
endothelial cells and circulating blood cells. L-glutamine may improve the NADH/NAD+ redox balance,
reducing oxidative damage, decreasing sickling, and improving membrane integrity of RBCs.
• Key points are adapted from Katzung & Trevor’s Pharmacology
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Iron Deficiency Anemia
Iron Supplements
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Background: Physiologic Iron Regulation and Dietary Sources
Regulation:
Iron balance is achieved by changing intestinal absorption and storage of iron in response to the body’s
needs. Less iron is absorbed when iron stores are adequate. More iron is absorbed when iron stores are
low.
• ~10% of an oral dose is absorbed when iron stores are normal.
• 20-30% of an oral dose is absorbed when iron stores are inadequate.
• The relative percentage of absorbed iron decreases with increasing dose.
In an iron-deficient individual, about 50-100 mg of iron can be incorporated into hemoglobin daily
Dietary sources of Iron:
Animal-based (Fe2+): Heme iron
Plant-based (Fe3+): Leafy greens, legumes, nuts/seeds, dried fruits, fortified foods
Gastric acid allows Fe3+ dissociation from food proteins → soluble Fe3+.
At pH>5 → Fe3+ forms highly insoluble Fe(OH) .
3
Vitamin C is a strong reducing agent (antioxidant): Food rich in vitamin C (citrus fruits, bell peppers,
broccoli) increase absorption of non-heme iron by reducing Fe3+ → Fe2+.
Polyphenols / tannins and calcium form insoluble complexes with iron. Drinking tea, coffee or calcium-rich
milk during meals can reduce iron absorption.
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Iron Absorption, Transport, Metabolism, and Storage
1. Iron is absorbed via divalent metal
transporter 1 (DMT1) and heme carrier protein
1 (HCP1). (Fe3+ is reduced by duodenal
cytochrome b, DB.)
• Iron is stored as ferritin (F) and exported via
ferroportin (FP) and
• Transported to bone marrow or hepatocytes
as transferrin (Tf)-Fe3+ iron complex
• Internalized by binding of Tf-iron complex to
transferrin receptors (TfR)
2. Iron in erythrocyte precursors is used for
heme synthesis.
3. Iron in hepatocytes is stored as ferritin.
4. Iron is reclaimed from senescent RBCs by
macrophages that phagocytize them and
exported or stored as ferritin.
Hepcidin is a peptide hormone synthesized in
hepatocytes. It regulates iron absorption,
recycling, and release by binding ferroportin, Katzung Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 14e, 2021; Figure 33-1
Ferrous iron (Fe2+), blue diamonds, squares; ferric iron (Fe3+), red; DB, duodenal
which is internalized→  serum iron levels. 10
cytochrome B; F, ferritin
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Iron Replacement Products
Goals of therapy: To fully replace iron balance, identify and treat the
underlying cause, and prevent recurrence
Oral supplementation IV administration preferred in the following:
• Effective • Oral iron is ineffective or poorly tolerated
• Safe • Severe or ongoing blood loss
• Readily available • Gastric bypass or resection→  gastric acid
• Inexpensive • Malabsorption syndromes
Take on empty stomach:
• Chronic diseases (inflammation)
• Coffee, tea, dairy, fiber, many
• High iron demand such as hemodialysis,
foods can reduce absorption.
chemotherapy, or erythropoietin use
Monitor lab values:
• Serum ferritin directly measures iron stores. Low level is the most sensitive and
specific test.
• Other critical markers: low hemoglobin/hematocrit, low MCV, low serum iron, high
total iron binding capacity
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Amount of
Product elemental iron Comments
Ferrous sulfate 65 mg • Most common formulation
325 mg tablet 44 mg/5mL • Generally tolerable
220 mg/5 mL solution • 2-4 x daily for anemia tx
Iron dextran, 50 mg/mL • Test dose prior to first dose
low molecular weight • IV infusion: One large dose or multiple doses
Colloidal solution of ferric • Anaphylaxis potential
oxychloride complexed with • Delayed hypersensitivity reactions, especially
dextran in patients with history of allergies or
rheumatoid arthritis
• Processed by macrophages
Several more oral iron products are available. They differ in their iron content and tolerability.
Several more IV iron products are available. Test doses are not required. All are equally efficacious.
Fatal hypersensitivity / anaphylactoid reactions occurred with high molecular weight iron
dextran (HMW ID) formulations. This product has been withdrawn from the market. 12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Adverse Effects and Drug Interactions of Iron Replacement Products
Oral supplementation: IV administration:
Local GI irritation • Fatal anaphylactoid (IgE-mediated) reaction
• Abdominal pain o Iron dextran, high molecular weight mainly
• Nausea o Prior reaction to HMW ID is the strongest
predictor.
• Constipation
Infusion related:
• Diarrhea
• Flushing, headache, dizziness, metallic taste, nausea,
• Dark stools (harmless)
myalgias, arthralgias, transient hypotension
• May exacerbate asthma or inflammatory arthritis
(premedication may be indicated)
Drug interactions:
Iron can reduce absorption of levothyroxine, quinolone antibiotics, levodopa, phosphate
supplements, many others.
Iron absorption can be reduced by antacids, bisphosphonates, tetracyclines.
Doses should be separated. Timeframe recommendations vary by drug combinations.
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the goals of iron supplementation therapy?
• To fully replace iron balance, identify and treat the underlying cause, and prevent recurrence
What is the first-line treatment of iron deficiency anemia?
• Oral iron supplement
What laboratory value best reflects total body iron stores?
• Serum ferritin directly measures iron stores. Low level is the most sensitive and specific test.
• Other critical markers: low hemoglobin/hemotocrit, low MCV, low serum iron, high total iron
binding capacity.
Which form of iron is absorbed by enterocytes.
• Fe2+: Heme iron (animal foods) or Fe3+ (plants) → DCytB → Fe2+
Why should oral iron supplements be taken on an empty stomach?
• Polyphenols in coffee and tea, calcium-rich foods and fiber form insoluble complexes with
non-heme iron, which reduces iron absorption.
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Check your knowledge
How does the body regulate the amount of iron that is absorbed?
• The body’s needs: Less iron is absorbed when iron stores are adequate. More iron is
absorbed when iron stores are low.
• A lower percentage of iron is absorbed with higher doses (saturable absorption).
What are some important drug interactions?
• Iron reduces absorption of levothyroxine, quinolones, levodopa and others
• Iron absorption is reduced by antacids, bisphosphonates, tetracycline
When is IV iron infusion preferred?
• Rapid iron correction is needed / Oral iron is not tolerated or effective / Impaired absorption
What vitamin enhances oral absorption of iron?
• Vitamin C a strong reducing agent: Fe3+ → Fe2+
Why is gastric acid important for absorption of iron from plant-based food?
• Acid releases Fe3+ from proteins in food, solubilizing it so it is available for conversion to
Fe2+.
15
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Folate and Vitamin B12 Deficiencies
Brief background
Folic acid and vitamin B12 are coenzymes for various metabolic functions, including the purine
and thymidylate synthesis for the synthesis of DNA and proteins necessary for cell replication
and erythropoiesis and in fat and carbohydrate metabolism.
Deficiency of either folate or B12 decreases the synthesis of methionine and s-adenosyl-
methionine (SAM), which interferes with DNA synthesis, protein synthesis, several methylation
reactions, and synthesis of polyamines and results in cellular maturation abnormalities.
• Nuclear maturation is delayed → fewer RBCs → anemia
• RNA and protein synthesis continue → cytoplasm grows → megaloblasts → megaloblastic
anemia.
Deficiency of vitamin B12 (but not folate) can lead to impaired formation of the myelin sheath,
resulting in neurological symptoms:
Paresthesia in peripheral nerves and weakness; progresses to spasticity, ataxia,
neuropsychiatric changes (may be irreversible).
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Folic Acid Deficiency
Folic Acid Supplementation
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Folic Acid Metabolism and Deficiency
Folic acid is a water-soluble vitamin.
Dietary folate is present as polyglutamated folate. These
polyglutamates are hydrolyzed to monoglutamate forms by
brush-border glutamate carboxypeptidase.
Folic acid is then reduced by dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR) in the mucosa of the duodenum and proximal
jejunum to tetrahydrofolate (THF), subsequently
methylated in the liver, secreted into bile, and undergoes
enterohepatic circulation (the liver is major regulator of
folate).
Folate is stored as polyglutamates in hepatocytes and
other tissues.
Folate deficiency causes a shortage of THF needed for
DNA synthesis and stalls cell division in RBC
precursors. Folate depletion takes several months to
occur.
Folate deficiency does not cause the characteristic
PteGlu = pteroyl-L-glutamic acid = folic acid
neurologic syndrome seen in vitamin B12 deficiency.
18
Goodman & Gilman’s 2023: Figure 45-9
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Folic Acid (vitamin B9)
Oral; 85-100% bioavailability with and without foodIM, subQ, IV (rarely necessary)
PK urine excretion
Dose: 1 mg to 5 mg daily (0.4 mg maintenance dose)
For the treatment of megaloblastic anemia, the goal is to reverse folate deficiency, stimulate
Goal
production of healthy RBCs, and achieve complete hematological remission.
Reticulocyte count increases in 3 to 4 days
Effects
Hgb and Hct improve in ~1-2 weeks; normalize in 4 to 8 weeks
Avoid folic acid monotherapy administration in patients with vitamin B12 deficiency.
➢ Folic acid monotherapy is appropriate only when laboratory testing confirms low RBC and
serum folate levels and normal B12 levels.
Why?
Caution
1. Folic acid monotherapy unmasks vitamin B12 deficiency by correcting anemia but allowing
neurological damage to progress unnoticed.
2. Worsening neurological complications of vitamin B12 deficiency may be irreversible.
Folate alone does not prevent or treat neurologic damage from B12 deficiency.
Drugs that reduce folate absorption or metabolism:
A) Phenytoin, sulfasalazine, alcohol
19
M) DHFR inhibitors: methotrexate, trimethoprim, pyrimethamine
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Vitamin B12 Deficiency
Cyanocobalamin
Hydroxocobalamin
Goodman & Gilman, 2018, Figure 41-5
Risk factors for B12 deficiency: Vitamin B12 is stored in the liver. If vitamin B12 cannot be absorbed,
vegan or strict vegetarian diet as in people with dietary insufficiency, malabsorption, or lack
of intrinsic factor, hepatic stores are depleted, resulting in vitamin
gastric or bariatric surgery
B12 deficiency. (It usually takes 3 to 5 years to deplete the stores.)
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Goals of vitamin B12 therapy in megaloblastic anemia is to rapidly correct the deficiency, restore
hematologic parameters, and prevent or reverse neurologic damage.
• B12 (methylcobalamin) is a cofactor of methionine synthase in
thymidylate synthesis and various other biochemical interactions.
MTHF THF
“Methyl-folate trap” leads to megaloblastic anemia:
• MTHF is not converted to THF when B12 is absent, which leads to
functional folate deficiency even if dietary folate intake is
“folate trap”
adequate.
in B12 deficiency
Impaired methylmalonyl-CoA mutase function leads to disruption of
myelin sheath production → neurologic damage
• B12 deficiency causes dysfunction of the enzyme. Methylmalonyl-
CoA and propionyl-CoA accumulate resulting in production of
abnormal fatty acids that are incorporated into neuronal lipids and
disrupt the structure and function of the myelin sheath.
• Paresthesia in peripheral nerves and weakness; progresses to
spasticity, ataxia, neuropsychiatric changes (may be irreversible).
1. Methylcobalamin is an intermediate in the transfer of a methyl
group from N 5-methyltetrahydrofolate to homocysteine, forming
methionine.
Katzung, 2024, Figure 33-2
2. Isomerization of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA by
Enzymatic reactions that use vitamin B
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase 12 21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Pharmacokinetics
Cyanocobalamin Hydroxocobalamin
A Oral tablet, sublingual liquid and tablet, nasal solution, IM IM for the treatment of B12 deficiency
injection, deep subQ injection IV or IO for treatment of cyanide poisoning
Dosing: 1000 mcg daily, 1-2 weeks then monthly maintenance 1000 mcg IM maintenance, anemia every 2-3 months
Cyanide poisoning 5 gm x2 IV / IO infusion
Oral absorption is variable from the terminal ileum. Intrinsic factor and calcium are required to transfer the compound
across the intestinal mucosa.
Cyanocobalamin oral bioavailability: 1.2% in patients with pernicious anemia → IM administration is necessary.
Nasal 6.1% (relative to IM) → useful for maintenance in patients with pernicious anemia or malabsorption
D Transcobalamins: Specialized glycoproteins that transport vitamin B12 to the various cells of the body
Hydroxocobalamin is more highly protein bound and remains in circulation longer → longer duration.
M Cyanocobalamin is converted in tissues to active coenzymes, Hydroxocobalamin is also converted to
methylcobalamin and deoxyadenosylcobalamin. methylcobalamin and deoxyadenosylcobalamin.
The cyanide is metabolized in the liver to nontoxic thiocyanate.
E urine/feces 50% to 98% unchanged Urine, 50-60% within 72 hours
Thiocyanate is excreted in urine.
Storage: 90% (1 to 10mg) is stored in the liver as active coenzyme.
It is also stored in bone marrow, kidneys, and adrenal glands.
22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Check your knowledge
What vitamin deficiencies lead to megaloblastic anemia?
• Folate and vitamin B12.
How do the mechanisms of anemia by the two vitamins differ?
• Folic acid deficiency leads to diminished tetrahydrofolate (THF). Therefore, THF is not
available for the methyl transfers needed in the synthesis of thymidylate and purines essential
for DNA replication during cell division, which stalls cell division in the erythroid precursors.
• B12 deficiency traps folate as unusable methylfolate, which stops production of the
thymidylate and purines needed for RBC synthesis – functional folate deficiency.
Which vitamin deficiency leads to neurological symptoms and why?
• B12 deficiency causes dysfunction of the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase.
• Methylmalonyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA accumulate resulting in production of abnormal fatty
acids that are incorporated into neuronal lipids and disrupt the structure and function of the
myelin sheath, resulting in neurological symptoms:
• Paresthesia in peripheral nerves and weakness; progresses to spasticity, ataxia,
neuropsychiatric changes (may be irreversible).
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Check your knowledge
How does absorption of folic acid and vitamin B12 differ?
Folic acid → DHFR in duodenum / proximal jejunum → liver
Vitamin B12 → complex with intrinsic factor → absorbed in terminal ileum → liver
Details:
• Folic acid is present in foods as polyglutamates, which are hydrolyzed to monoglutamate
forms by brush-border glutamate carboxypeptidase.
• Folic acid (including supplemental folic acid) is reduced by dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
in the mucosal epithelial cells of the duodenum and proximal jejunum to tetrahydrofolate,
subsequently methylated in the liver, secreted into bile, and undergoes enterohepatic
circulation (the liver is major regulator of folate). Folate is stored as polyglutamates in
hepatocytes and other tissues.
• In the duodenum, vitamin B12 binds intrinsic factor, which is produced by gastric parietal
cells. The complex travels through the intestine to the distal ileum and binds specific
receptors. The complex is internalized in ileal cells by endocytosis. B12 is separated from IF
and released into the bloodstream.
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (EPAs)
Epoetin alfa: recombinant human EPO
Epoetin alfa biosimilars
Darbepoetin alfa: glycosylated EPO → longer duration
Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta (modified EPO structure) → much longer duration
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
ESAs: Pharmacokinetics
Epoetin alfa Darbepoetin alfa
A IV, SubQ (slow absorption) SubQ; slow absorption
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD):
Adults: 36%
Bioavailability Adults: 30-50%
Neonates: 42%
Children: 32-70%
Large molecules diffuse into lymphatics – slow and capacity limited.
Proteases, peptidases, macrophages in the interstitial space degrade the molecule.
Administration 3 times weekly once every 1-2 weeks
frequency (not significantly removed by dialysis) (not significantly removed by dialysis)
D Erythropoietin concentrates in liver, bone marrow, and kidneys
CKD: IV 35-139 hours
t½ Adults, subQ: 16-67 h Adults: 4-13 h depends on kidney function and individual
elimination
Children: 5-24 h metabolic rates
Onset Hgb/Hct increase 2-6 weeks after initiating Tx
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
ESAs are recombinant analogs of EPO and mimic erythropoiesis
Physiology:
Erythropoietin (EPO) is expressed mainly by peritubular
interstitial cells of the kidney in response to low oxygen
levels (hypoxia or anemia).
Pharmacology: Like natural EPO…
• ESAs bind the erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) on
erythroid progenitor cells in bone marrow.
• The receptors dimerize and activate the JAK/STAT
signaling pathway → PI3/AKT and MAP
• Increase survival and proliferation of erythroid
precursors:
o Reduced apoptosis of progenitor cells
o Increased maturation into reticulocytes
o Increased RBC production
The Big Picture: Medical Biochemistry > The Urinary System Figure 18-9 27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
ESAs: Indications and Monitoring
Goal of ESA therapy: To reduce the need for RBC transfusions by increasing Hb to the
lowest level that alleviates anemia while minimizing thrombotic and cardiovascular risk.
Epoetin alfa / Darbepoetin alfa
 Anemia of CKD  Chronic kidney disease is the most common
 Symptomatic myelodysplastic reason for ESA therapy.
syndrome
Treatment
 Chemotherapy-induced anemia  ESAs have been shown to increase serious
indications
in selected cancer patients. risks, especially thromboembolism and worse
cancer outcomes, without improving survival
 Hemoglobin: once weekly until maintenance dose established, then monthly
 Iron stores (TIBC, ferritin) prior to and during therapy (ensure iron intake)
 Blood pressure
Monitoring
 For seizures for first few months due to increased blood viscosity and rapid
changes in blood pressure – seizures are uncommon.
 CKD patients: Serum chemistry and fluid balance; neurologic sx (seizures)
28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
ESAs: Adverse Effects
ESAs increase blood viscosity, thrombotic risk, and can worsen hypertension.
US Boxed Warnings: ESAs increase the risk of death, MI, stroke, venous
thromboembolism (VTE), thrombosis of vascular access
 Hypertension  Dermatologic effects reported:
 Cardiovascular events: Rash,
venous thromboembolism, Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis
myocardial infarction, stroke
Chronic kidney disease (CKD): At Hb levels >11, CKD patients are at greater risk of cardiovascular
adverse events.
 Pure red cell aplasia due to development of neutralizing anti-EPO antibodies is reported primarily in
CKD patients receiving epoetin alfa SubQ.
Chemo-induced anemia:
VTE, Shortened overall survival and reduced time to tumor progression or recurrence
CONTRAINDICATIONS:
Patients with uncontrolled hypertension, severe red cell aplasia that begins after treatment, history of
hypersensitivity reactions, combination therapy with other ESAs
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the main source of erythropoietin in adults?
• Specialized peritubular interstitial cells of the kidney in response to low oxygen levels
(hypoxia or anemia).
Why is the bioavailability of subcutaneous epoetin-alfa so low?
• ESAs are large molecules that slowly diffuse into lymphatics, which is capacity limited.
• Proteases, peptidases, macrophages in the interstitial space degrade the molecule
How do ESAs stimulate erythropoiesis?
• ESAs directly bind the erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) on erythroid progenitor cells in bone
marrow.
• The receptors dimerize and activate the JAK/STAT signaling pathway → PI3/AKT and MAP.
• Note: ESAs do not stimulate release of EPO from.
What is the effect of activating the signaling pathway?
• Increased survival and proliferation of erythroid precursors:
o Reduced apoptosis of progenitor cells
o Increased maturation into reticulocytes
o Increased RBC production
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the primary clinical goal of ESA therapy?
• To safely reduce the need for RBC transfusions by using the lowest dose needed to alleviate
anemia.
In which clinical condition is ESA therapy most frequently used?
• Anemia of chronic kidney disease
• Cells in the renal cortex that product EPO are damaged or lost due to injury, inflammation,
and fibrosis.
What laboratory parameter is used to guide EPA dose adjustments?
• Hemoglobin concentration
What is the major mechanism-related adverse event of ESA therapy?
• Increased risk of thrombosis that can lead to myocardial infarction and stroke.
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Disease-modifying therapies for sickle cell disease
Hydroxyurea – first-line therapy
Crizanlizumab
L-Glutamine
(pharmaceutical grade)
These medications are intended to be started when
the individual is well.
They are not appropriate for treating acute pain.
32
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Pharmacokinetics: Hydroxyurea
A Oral; well absorbed
Protein binding ~80%
D Widely distributed including the brain.
Concentrates in leukocytes and erythrocytes
Hepatic (urease by intestinal bacteria)
M
Bioavailability 100%
E Urine ~40% of the dose in patients with sickle cell anemia
Effect HbF induction: Fetal hemoglobin increases in 4-12 weeks.
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Sickle Cell Anemia Goal of Therapy and Mechanisms
Goal To reduce sickling by increasing fetal hemoglobin(HbF) and improving red
cell physiology.
Increasing HbF inhibits hemoglobin S polymerization, which reduces
vaso-occlusion, hemolysis, and disease complications.
Hydroxyurea RNR inhibitor: Inhibits ribonuclease reduction and DNA synthesis, which
halts the cell cycle in S phase, induces stress erythropoiesis and
enhances -globin gene transcription → increases levels of HbF.
See next slide.
Crizanlizumab P-selectin inhibitor: Prevents adhesion of P-selectin to the endothelium, which
can help manage pain crises
P-selectin recruits leukocytes to the site of occlusion and facilitates interactions between platelets
and leukocytes, which exacerbates inflammation and contributes to the severity of pain crisis.
L-Glutamine Oxidative stress reduction: Enhances NADH/NAD+ balance in red blood cells,
which supports glycolysis for ATP generation, maintains hemoglobin iron in the
Fe2+ (reduced) state, and improves membrane integrity (a downstream effect).
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Hydroxyurea Mechanism in Sickle Cell Anemia
Hydroxyurea binds iron molecules in
catalytic subunit of RNR and inhibits the
Diphosphates, NDPs Diphosphates, dNDPs
enzyme, halting cell cycle in the S phase.
Biochemistry, DNA biosynthesis: Supporting mechanism:
NDPs – RNR → dNDPs → DNA synthesis Hydroxyurea is converted to nitric oxide (NO) →
RNR catalyzes the reductive conversion of stimulates soluble guanylyl cyclase → cGMP
ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides
cGMP signaling enhances -globin gene
(rate limiting step).
transcription → HbF
Stress erythropoiesis:
Hydroxyurea binds iron molecules in catalytic
Hydroxyurea’s contributing actions
subunit of RNR→ slows DNA synthesis in
reduce vaso-occlusion:
rapidly dividing RBCs→ mild bone marrow
HU-induced mild bone marrow suppression
suppression.
lowers neutrophils, platelets, and adhesion

molecules → decreases inflammatory cell-
The bone marrow shifts toward production of
adhesion molecule interactions and
new immature RBCs – stress erythroid
microvascular plugging
precursors – that preferentially express -globin
→ Vaso-occlusive pain crises are reduced.
genes→ HbF production
35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Multiple beneficial effects of hydroxyurea for
sickle cell anemia.
(1) Fetal hemoglobin induction by nitric oxide-
dependent activation of soluble guanylyl
cyclase, which alters kinetics of HbS
polymerization;
(2) Lower neutrophil and reticulocyte counts
from ribonucleotide reductase inhibition
and marrow cytotoxicity;
(3) Decreased adhesiveness and improved
rheology of circulating neutrophils and
reticulocytes;
(4) Reduced hemolysis through improved
erythrocyte hydration, macrocytosis, and
reduced intracellular sickling;
(5) Nitric oxide (NO) release with potential
Russell E. Ware Blood 2010;115:5300-5311
local vasodilatation and improved vascular
©2010 by American Society of Hematology
response.
36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Hydroxyurea Adverse Effects
Hydroxyurea is safe for long-term use in sickle cell disease, when
appropriately monitored.
• Myelosuppression: Reproductive Implications
neutropenia (mainly), anemia, • Teratogenic in animal reproduction studies
thrombocytopenia
• May cause fetal harm
• GI distrubances
• May damage spermatozoa and testicular
• Dermatologic reactions (mild) tissue; azoospermia or oligospermia
• Hyperpigmentation → darkening of • Males and females of reproductive potential
skin and nails should use effective contraception during
and for at least 6 months to 1 year following
• Hair loss
therapy.
Frequent monitoring of CBC with
Breast Feeding Not recommended
differential, especially during drug
initiation and dose titration.
37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Check your knowledge
What clinical complications of sickle cell disease are reduced with hydroxyurea therapy?
• Vaso-occlusive pain crisis and acute chest syndrome.
What is the goal of hydroxyurea therapy in sickle cell anemia?
• To reduce sickling by increasing fetal hemoglobin (HbF) and improving red cell physiology.
How does the effect of hydroxyurea improve sickle cell disease?
• HbF reduces polymerization by HbS, which is the root cause of sickling and vaso-occlusive
crisis.
What is the principal mechanisms of hydroxyurea in sickle cell anemia?
Stress erythropoiesis:
• Hydroxyurea binds iron molecules in catalytic subunit of RNR, which slows DNA synthesis in
rapidly dividing RBCs, leading to mild bone marrow suppression.
• The bone marrow shifts toward production of new immature RBCs – stress erythroid
precursors – that preferentially express -globin genes, thereby increasing HbF production.
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Check your knowledge
What are secondary mechanisms?
• HU increases nitric oxide, which stimulates soluble guanylyl cyclase, increasing cGMP
concentrations. cGMP signaling enhances -globin gene transcription → HbF.
• HU-induced mild bone marrow suppression lowers neutrophils, platelets, and adhesion
molecules, which decreases inflammatory cell-adhesion molecule interactions and
microvascular plugging. Vaso-occlusive pain crises are reduced.
What is the major dose-limiting toxicity of hydroxyurea?
• Bone marrow suppression, especially neutropenia.
What cosmetic effects can occur with long-term therapy?
• Hyperpigmentation can cause darkening of skin and nails.
What laboratory test must be monitored during therapy?
• Complete blood count (CBC) with differential.
Is long-term hydroxyurea therapy in sickle cells disease safe?
• Yes, when appropriately monitored (based on long-term studies).
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Disease-modifying therapies for sickle cell disease in brief
Therapy Hydroxyurea Crizanlizumab L-glutamine
Age All, including infants 16 years and older 5 years and older
Route Oral once daily IV every 4 weeks after initial Oral twice daily
doses on weeks 0,2,and 4
MOA  HbF levels, RBC water Anti-P-selectin: reduces Alters redox state of RBCs:
content, deformability of sickled interactions between L-Glutamine is a NAD+ precursor. NAD+
cells, and alters adhesion of endothelial cells and is low in sickled RBCs. L-Glutamine can
RBCs to endothelium circulating RBCs reduce oxidative stress and improve
deformability of RBCs
Monitoring Frequent monitoring of CBC None None
and dose titration especially
during drug initiation
Benefits • Reduced vaso-occlusive • Reduced frequency of acute • Reduced frequency of acute pain
complications and acute chest pain episodes episodes
syndrome • Can be combined with • Can be combined with hydroxyurea
•  transfusion requirement hydroxyurea • Good safety profile
• Long-term safety/efficacy data • Good safety profile
Comments • Neutropenia, IV access, hospital admin. Use pharmaceutical grade powder pkts
hyperpigmentation, hair loss Arthraligias, back pain Mild GI symptoms
• Caution prior to conception Infusion reactions possible Long-term efficacy data are lacking
(males/females) and during
first trimester of pregnancy
--- SLIDE 41 ---
Summary: Pharmacology of Anemias
41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
• Any treatable cause of anemia should be corrected.
Iron deficiency anemia:
• Elemental iron supplementation supports hemoglobin synthesis / erythropoiesis by restoring iron
stores (ferritin) and circulation iron (transferrin) saturation. IV iron is given for chronic anemias that
cannot be maintained with oral iron alone.
• Oral iron supplements are best absorbed on an empty stomach. GI discomfort, constipation, and
dark stools are common. IV iron products may cause injection reactions, hypersensitivity reactions,
and exacerbate asthma and inflammatory arthritis.
• Reticulocyte count rises in ~1 week; Hb rises in ~2-3 weeks with iron supplement.
Megaloblastic anemia
• Folate (vitamin B9) supplementation replenishes tetrahydrofolate needed for DNA synthesis and
corrects thymidylate production in rapidly dividing cells. It corrects anemia in days to weeks. It does
not correct neurological deficits resulting from vitamin B12 deficiency.
• Vitamin B12 restores the cofactor for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase and methionine synthase, supports
DNA synthesis and myelin integrity. Vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin) administration is used in the
treatment of pernicious anemia, malabsorption (Crohn disease, gastric bypass), strict vegetarian
diet. Neurologic symptoms improve but may be irreversible if deficiency is long-standing. IM or oral
are effective depending on the etiology.
• Hydroxocobalamin is used for B12 deficiency and as an antidote for cyanide poisoning.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (EPAs):
• Recombinant erythropoietin that directly bind EPORs on erythroid precursors, activate JAK-STAT
pathway, resulting in RBC production.
• They are used in chronic kidney disease (primary use) and selected cancer patients receiving
myelosuppressive chemotherapy. The goal of therapy is to reduce the need for transfusion using the
lowest effective dose. (The goal is not to normalize hemoglobin.)
• Risks: hypertension and thrombotic events – eg, MI, stroke, venous thromboembolism – and may
shorten the overall survival or time to tumor progression or recurrence in cancer patients.
Sickle cell anemia
• Hydroxyurea is and RNR inhibitor that increases hemoglobin F production by inducing -globin gene
expression. It also increases nitric oxide, improving vasodilation.
• HbF inhibits HbS polymerization, which reduces sickling, veno-occlusive crisis, and acute chest
syndrome.
• The dose limiting toxicity is myelosuppression, mainly neutropenia. Monitoring CBC with differential
is required.
• Hydroxyurea has long-term safety and efficacy data in the treatment of sickle cell anemia.
• Crizanlizumab and L-glutamine are options and may be used as adjuncts to hydroxyurea therapy.
43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the goals of iron supplementation therapy?
• To fully replace iron balance, identify and treat the underlying cause, and prevent recurrence
What is the first-line treatment of iron deficiency anemia?
• Oral iron supplement
What laboratory value best reflects total body iron stores?
• Serum ferritin directly measures iron stores. Low level is the most sensitive and specific test.
• Other critical markers: low hemoglobin/hemotocrit, low MCV, low serum iron, high total iron
binding capacity.
Which form of iron is absorbed by enterocytes.
• Fe2+: Heme iron (animal foods) or Fe3+ (plants) → DCytB → Fe2+
Why should oral iron supplements be taken on an empty stomach?
• Polyphenols in coffee and tea, calcium-rich foods and fiber form insoluble complexes with
non-heme iron, which reduces iron absorption.
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Check your knowledge
How does the body regulate the amount of iron that is absorbed?
• The body’s needs: Less iron is absorbed when iron stores are adequate. More iron is
absorbed when iron stores are low.
• A lower percentage of iron is absorbed with higher doses (saturable absorption).
What are some important drug interactions?
• Iron reduces absorption of levothyroxine, quinolones, levodopa and others
• Iron absorption is reduced by antacids, bisphosphonates, tetracycline
When is IV iron infusion preferred?
• Rapid iron correction is needed / Oral iron is not tolerated or effective / Impaired absorption
What vitamin enhances oral absorption of iron?
• Vitamin C a strong reducing agent: Fe3+ → Fe2+
Why is gastric acid important for absorption of iron from plant-based food?
• Acid releases Fe3+ from proteins in food, solubilizing it so it is available for conversion to
Fe2+.
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Check your knowledge: Folate and Vitamin B12 supplements
What vitamin deficiencies lead to megaloblastic anemia?
• Folate and vitamin B12.
How do the mechanisms of anemia by the two vitamins differ?
• Folic acid deficiency leads to diminished tetrahydrofolate (THF). Therefore, THF is not
available for the one-carbon transfers needed in the synthesis of thymidylate and purines
essential for DNA replication during cell division, stalling cell division in the erythroid
precursors.
• B12 deficiency traps folate as unusable methylfolate, which stops production of the
thymidylate and purines needed for RBC synthesis – functional folate deficiency.
Which vitamin deficiency leads to neurological symptoms and why?
• B12 deficiency causes dysfunction of the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase.
• Methylmalonyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA accumulate resulting in production of abnormal fatty
acids that are incorporated into neuronal lipids and disrupt the structure and function of the
myelin sheath, resulting in neurological symptoms:
• Paresthesia in peripheral nerves and weakness; progresses to spasticity, ataxia,
neuropsychiatric changes (may be irreversible).
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Check your knowledge: Folate and Vitamin B12 supplements
How does absorption of folic acid and vitamin B12 differ?
Folic acid → DHFR in duodenum / proximal jejunum → liver
Vitamin B12 → complex with intrinsic factor → absorbed in terminal ileum → liver
Details:
• Folic acid is present in foods as polyglutamates, which are hydrolyzed to monoglutamate
forms by brush-border glutamate carboxypeptidase.
• Folic acid (including supplemental folic acid) is reduced by dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
in the mucosal epithelial cells of the duodenum and proximal jejunum to tetrahydrofolate,
subsequently methylated in the liver, secreted into bile, and undergoes enterohepatic
circulation (the liver is major regulator of folate). Folate is stored as polyglutamates in
hepatocytes.
• In the duodenum, vitamin B12 binds intrinsic factor, which is produced by gastric parietal
cells. The complex travels through the intestine to the distal ileum and binds specific
receptors. The complex is internalized in ileal cells by endocytosis. B12 is separated from IF
and released into the bloodstream.
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Check your knowledge: ESA therapy
What is the main source of erythropoietin in adults?
• Specialized peritubular interstitial cells of the kidney in response to low oxygen levels
(hypoxia or anemia).
Why is the bioavailability of subcutaneous epoetin-alfa so low?
• ESAs are large molecules that slowly diffuse into lymphatics, which is capacity limited.
• Proteases, peptidases, macrophages in the interstitial space degrade the molecule
How do ESAs stimulate erythropoiesis?
• ESAs directly bind the erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) on erythroid progenitor cells in bone
marrow.
• The receptors dimerize and activate the JAK/STAT signaling pathway → PI3/AKT and MAP.
• Note: ESAs do not stimulate release of EPO from.
What is the effect of activating the signaling pathway?
• Increased survival and proliferation of erythroid precursors:
o Reduced apoptosis of progenitor cells
o Increased maturation into reticulocytes
o Increased RBC production
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Check your knowledge: ESA therapy
What is the primary clinical goal of ESA therapy?
• To safely reduce the need for RBC transfusions by using the lowest dose needed to alleviate
anemia.
In which clinical condition is ESA therapy most frequently used?
• Anemia of chronic kidney disease
• Cells in the renal cortex that product EPO are damaged or lost due to injury, inflammation,
and fibrosis.
What laboratory parameter is used to guide EPA dose adjustments?
• Hemoglobin concentration
What is the major mechanism-related adverse event of ESA therapy?
• Increased risk of thrombosis that can lead to myocardial infarction and stroke.
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Check your knowledge: Hydroxyurea therapy for sickle cell anemia
What clinical complications of sickle cell disease are reduced with hydroxyurea therapy?
• Vaso-occlusive pain crisis and acute chest syndrome.
What is the goal of hydroxyurea therapy in sickle cell anemia?
• To reduce sickling by increasing fetal hemoglobin (HbF) and improving red cell physiology.
How does the effect of hydroxyurea improve sickle cell disease?
• HbF reduces polymerization by HbS, which is the root cause of sickling and vaso-occlusive
crisis.
What is the principal mechanisms of hydroxyurea in sickle cell anemia?
Stress erythropoiesis:
• Hydroxyurea binds iron molecules in catalytic subunit of RNR, which slows DNA synthesis in
rapidly dividing RBCs, leading to mild bone marrow suppression.
• The bone marrow shifts toward production of new immature RBCs – stress erythroid
precursors – that preferentially express -globin genes, thereby increasing HbF production.
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Check your knowledge: Hydroxyurea therapy for sickle cell anemia
What are secondary mechanisms?
• HU increases nitric oxide, which stimulates soluble guanylyl cyclase, increasing cGMP
concentrations. cGMP signaling enhances -globin gene transcription → HbF.
• HU-induced mild bone marrow suppression lowers neutrophils, platelets, and adhesion
molecules, which decreases inflammatory cell-adhesion molecule interactions and
microvascular plugging. Vaso-occlusive pain crises are reduced.
What is the major dose-limiting toxicity of hydroxyurea?
• Bone marrow suppression, especially neutropenia.
What cosmetic effects can occur with long-term therapy?
• Hyperpigmentation can cause darkening of skin and nails.
What laboratory test must be monitored during therapy?
• Complete blood count (CBC) with differential.
Is long-term hydroxyurea therapy in sickle cells disease safe?
• Yes, when appropriately monitored (based on long-term studies).
51
--- SLIDE 52 ---
https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/49565939-level-energy-brain-of-person-from-low-tired-in-full-happy-cartoon-character-brain-with-low-charge-lack-energy-and-power-with-
high-energy-strain-burnout-illustration
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Resources
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 33: Agents Used in Cytopenias;
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 14e, 2023; Chapter 45:
Hematopoietic Agents: Growth Factors, Minerals, and Vitamins
Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e, 2023; Chapter 99: Megaloblastic Anemias
Access Medicine Pathophysiology of Blood Disorders, 2e, 2017; Chapter 3: Overview of the Anemias
Access Medicine Williams Hematology, 10e, 2021; Chapter 38: Anemia of Chronic Disease; Chapter 50: Disorders
of Hemoglobin Structure: Sickle Cell Anemia and Related Abnormalities
UpToDate Lexidrug monographs accessed March 2025
UpToDate: various topics; literature review current through Feb 2025
53
--- SLIDE 54 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R
54