SOURCE: Lecture # 156. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology: Antineoplastic Agents Part 1
Nonselective (conventional)
Cytotoxic Chemotherapy
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 3 ---
How will knowledge of cancer drugs
be relevant for my future practice as
a generalist or a specialist?
Primary care physicians – indeed, all health care
professionals – are members of the cancer survivors
health care team.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Following this session, students should be able to explain the
mechanisms of action, resistance, general adverse effects, dose-limiting
toxicities, cancer uses, and drug interactions:
1. Explain the fundamental principles of nonselective cytotoxic chemotherapy on
inducing DNA damage in relation to cell cycle phases and kinetics.
2. Relate the anticancer mechanisms actions of each category of antineoplastic
drugs to their effects.
3. Correlate the mechanisms of resistance with the mechanisms of drug action and
cellular mechanisms of detoxification and reduced drug accumulation.
4. Identify the dose-limiting toxicities of the cytotoxic chemotherapies.
5. Apply the mechanistic and pharmacokinetic properties of the anticancer drugs to
their potential adverse effects and drug interactions when presented with a case
vignette.
6. Create a concept map or other technique integrating the mechanisms of action
and resistance, potential toxicities, drug-disease and drug-drug interactions to
the selection of drugs for combination antineoplastic therapeutic regimens.
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions (questions FOR learning)
Optional materials:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Notes handout  Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Links
Scholar Rx Bricks:
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: General Pharmacology > Chemotherapy > Chemotherapy Agents
Title of Brick: Alkylating and Platinum Agents
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0016
Title of Brick: Antimetbolite Agents
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0017
Title of Brick: Topoisomerase Inhibitors, Microtubule Inhibitors, and Antitumor Antibiotics
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0019
Access Medicine Katzung Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 54: Cancer Chemotherapy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/book.aspx?bookid=3382#281742356
THE REVIEW BOOKS BELOW HAVE PRACTICE QUESTIONS
LWW Health Library, Medical Education; Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews, 8e, 2023; Chapter 37: Anticancer Drugs
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329619&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 54: Cancer
Chemotherapy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=28
5600220
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Chemotherapy:
Cytotoxic chemicals that kill cells or stop cell division leading to apoptosis
when proteins that initiate apoptosis, such as p53, are functional.
Alkylating agents Nucleophilic attack on DNA → DNA cross-linking → DNA damage → activate DNA
All phases of cell cycle mismatch repair (MMR) pathway → DNA strand breaks by repair enzymes →
apoptosis.
Platinum analogs Form covalent metal adducts with DNA → DNA cross-linking → DNA damage →
All phases of cell cycle activates MMR ultimately leading to apoptosis
Antimetabolites Folate, purine, or pyrimidine analogs that inhibit DNA synthesis and repair in
S phase phase proliferating cells → p53 activation → apoptosis.
Antitumor antibiotics Intercalate in DNA, inhibit topoisomerase II, and generates free radicals →
G2/M phase primarily irreparable strand breaks, oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, and cell membranes.
Antimitotics Inhibit polymerization in microtubules (vinca alkaloids) or stabilize microtubules and
M phase prevent depolymerization (taxanes) → suppress spindle microtubule function → cell
cycle arrest → apoptosis
Camptothecin analogs Form drug-DNA-topoisomerase I complex → prevents resealing step → DNA
S phase damage accumulates → apoptosis
Epipodophyllotoxins Form drug-DNA-topoisomerase II complex → irreparable strand breaks → DNA
late S and G2 phase damage accumulates → apoptosis
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Biologic and small molecule targeted agents: Hormonal anticancer therapeutics:
These drugs block specific molecules in The growth of some cancers is regulated
oncogenic pathways that lead to by or dependent on hormones.
dysregulated cancer cell growth and
• Glucocorticoids (antiproliferative and
survival interferes with growth,
lympholytic properties)
progression, and spread of cancer.
• Estrogen receptor antagonists
• Signal transduction inhibitors
• Progesterone receptor agonists
– Inhibitors of growth factors and
(antiproliferative effects)
receptors
• Androgen receptor antagonists
– Inhibitors of intracellular pathways
• Steroidogenesis inhibitors
• Angiogenesis inhibitors
• Gonadotropin releasing hormone
• Antibody-drug conjugates
(GnRH) agonists and antagonists
• Immune checkpoint inhibitors
The hormonal drugs are not included in
• CAR-T cells this lecture.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
General Overview of Concepts
9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
• What are the goals of cancer therapy?
➢ To rid the body of malignant cells
➢ If cure is not possible, then the goal is to shrink the tumors
and relieve symptoms.
• Antineoplastic therapy entails surgery, radiation,
anticancer drugs
What are the patient’s goals?
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
File:DAMP chemical structure.png
Deoxynucleotide
(deoxyadenosine
monophosphate)
Helicase: unwinds DNA
DNA primase: creates primer (which is RNA that is later removed by exonuclease)
DNA polymerase: assembles the nucleotides, adding them to the previous 3-OH group
Okazaki fragment: newly synthesized DNA formed on the lagging template strand
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Cell Cycle
G2 checkpoint
M Phase
• Checkpoints
specific drugs
detect DNA damage leading
to repair or, if not reparable, to
apoptosis.
• Tumors with a high
percentage of proliferating
cells are most are responsive
to chemotherapy.
• Slow-growing tumors often
respond to chemotherapy that
inflicts high-level DNA
S Phase
specific drugs damage that overwhelms the
tumor’s repair mechanisms.
G1 checkpoint
12
http://www2.le.ac.uk/departments/genetics/vgec/schoolscolleges/topics/cellcycle-mitosis-meiosis
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Anticancer agents are intended to trigger apoptosis
• DNA alkylation or adduct
(phase nonspecific)
• DNA synthesis inhibitors
(S phase actions)
• Cell division inhibition
(M phase actions)
• Targeted therapy
– Block cancer growth pathways
– Enhance T cell function
https://www.biobool.com/news/162.html
At each cell cycle checkpoint, p53 and other specific proteins monitor for DNA damage, may initiate
DNA repair processes, or direct cells down the apoptotic pathway. When cells have normal
checkpoint function, drug-induced DNA damage will activate apoptosis at the G1/S or G2/M
boundary.
If the p53 gene product or other checkpoint proteins are mutated or absent or the checkpoint
function fails, damaged cells will not divert to the apoptotic pathway but will proceed through the S
phase and mitosis.
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Integration of cell death responses
Harrison’s Online 18e Figure 85-3
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Mechanisms of Resistance
1. Increased rate of DNA repair
2. Defective cell cycle checkpoint function
Drug
or mismatch repair (MMR) and DNA Drug Efflux
Inactivation
damage repair systems
3. Impaired apoptotic pathways
Reduced DNA Damage
4. Decreased drug accumulation:
Transport Repair
• Expression of efflux pumps Drug
Resistance
• Reduced transport into cancer cell
• Inactivation of drugs Drug Target Impaired Apoptotic
Alteration Pathways
• Decreased activation of prodrugs
5. Increased expression of drug detoxifying
Evasion of Defective Checkpoint
proteins, such as glutathione
Immune Attack Function
conjugation, that neutralize free radicals
6. Target alterations with decreased affinity
for the drugs
7. Tumor evasion of immune attack
15
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Chemotherapy Treatment Strategies
1. Drugs for slow-growing cancers and solid tumors damage DNA.
2. Drugs for rapidly proliferating tumors interfere with DNA synthesis or mitosis.
3. Endocrine therapy for hormone-responsive tumors lowers the amount or interferes with the
actions of the hormone, eg, estrogen or testosterone.
4. Multi-drug combinations include cytotoxic drugs acting at specific stages of cell cycle and/or
targeted agents that inhibit cancer growth pathways or boost the immune response against
the tumor.
• To maximize the effect and for synergy
• To minimize the development of resistance
5. Maximum individual doses are administered as frequently as possible, depending on:
• The time needed for the body to recover from side effects, such as neutropenia
• The type and stage of the cancer
• The treatment goals, such as curative or palliative
6. Avoid overlap in major toxicities (ideally)
7. Manage toxicities → antiemetics; analgesics; etc.; non-medical strategies
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Toxicities of Antineoplastic Agents
Rapidly proliferating cells:
Chemotherapies disrupt DNA function in
• Bone marrow suppression:  susceptibility
proliferating normal cells along with tumor cells.
to infection; bleeding
• GI: Intestinal epithelium: Severe vomiting,
A caution for all treatment regimens:
mucositis, stomatitis
The pharmacokinetics and toxicities of cancer
• Alopecia
drugs vary amongst individual patients.
• Cutaneous reactions
It is imperative to:
Tumor lysis syndrome:
• recognize toxicities early,
• Metabolic complication of chemotherapy,
• alter doses or discontinue offending
• Usually in lymphomas and leukemias
medication to relieve symptoms and
Drug-specific toxicities, acute and delayed
reduce risk, and
• Cardiac; Pulmonary; Hepatic; Renal; Neuro
• provide vigorous supportive care.
Secondary malignancy:
Dose-limiting toxicities are specific adverse effects
• Leukemia and other malignancies
of a drug severe enough to prevent an increase in the
• Teratogenicity / Fetotoxicity
dose.
They are critical in determining the maximum tolerated • Cancer immunotherapy: See Part 2
dose during clinical trials, especially in oncology. 17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Alkylating Agents
Cell cycle non-specific
There are many drugs in this class.
Alkylating agents interfere with DNA
integrity.
Neutrophilic alkylating agents transfer an alkyl ion that attacks
an electrophile forming a covalent bond between the alkyl and
the electrophile.
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Alkylation of DNA: Nucleophilic attack
Cell death depends on cancer cell
recognition of the adduct

activation of DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) pathway creates DNA
strand breaks by repair enzymes

Inter-/intrastrand
triggers apoptotic response
cross-linking
Essential mechanisms for cell death:
1) Recognition of the adduct
Alkylated N7 guanine
2) Activation of checkpoint proteins
3) Intact MMR / DDR systems, which induce
DNA strand breaks by repair enzymes
4) Normal genes for p53 and other proteins
that trigger apoptosis
Resistance develops rapidly when a drug is
used as a single agent.
19
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Toxicities of alkylating agents are related to DNA damage of normal
rapidly dividing cells and can be quite severe.
Rapidly proliferating cells:
• Bone marrow suppression: DOSE-LIMITING anemia, infection; bleeding
• GI mucosal toxicity: Severe vomiting, mucositis, stomatitis
• Cutaneous reactions / Hair loss (alopecia)
Tumor lysis syndrome in the treatment of lymphoma and leukemia
• Rapidly lysing cells release contents into blood stream:
• Hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,
• Acute kidney injury
Organ toxicity
• Hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
• Pulmonary – “Busulfan lung”
• Peripheral neuropathy
• Extravasation (leakage) from injection site: vesicant (causes blisters / ulcerations)
Secondary malignancy: Leukemia
• Pregnancy: Teratogenic • Reproductive system: amenorrhea  azospermia 20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Pharmacokinetics: prodrug → cytotoxic phosphoramide mustard & urotoxic metabolite
• I.V.; oral (high bioavailability)
• Prodrug
• Metabolic activation via CYP2B6
and other CYPs

hydroxycyclophosphamide

aldophosphamide

phosphoramide mustard
(active chemotherapy)
+
Acrolein
(toxic to bladder epithelium)
Hemorrhagic
cystitis
Anti-cancer
Citation: Chapter 54 Cancer Chemotherapy, Katzung BG, Vanderah TW. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 15e; 2021. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2988&sectionid=250603422 Accessed: May 19, 2022 Slide adapted by LG
Copyright © 2022 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Cyclophosphamide / Ifosfamide Mechanisms
Cytotoxicity
Resistance
Alkylation of nucleophilic groups
Increased expression of
on DNA bases, esp the N7 position
Aldehyde dehydrogenase →
of guanine →
increased rates of metabolic
• Inter-, intrastrand cross-linking,
degradation to inactive metabolites
• abnormal base pairing,
Increased expression of
• miscoding,
• strand breakage, or Glutathione transferases →
• depurination by excision of detoxification of most alkylating
guanine residues intermediates
23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Therapeutic Uses
The TAKEAWAY:
Cyclophosphamide is widely used for treatment of solid tumors, hematologic cancers
and it is a potent immunosuppressive, making it useful in autoimmune disorders.
Ifosfamide has more limited uses in the treatment of some solid tumors and lymphomas.
Cyclophosphamide Ifosfamide
• Broad use in adults and pediatrics for a • Testicular cancer
variety of
• Lymphomas
➢ hematologic cancers and
• Bone, tissue sarcomas
➢ solid tumors
• Bladder
• Potent immunosuppressive properties
• Cervical
 treatment of autoimmune disorders,
• Ovarian
e.g.
• Lung cancer
• Wegener’s granulomatosis,
• Rheumatoid arthritis, and
• Nephritic syndrome 24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Cyclophosphamide drug-specific serious toxicities
In addition to alkylating agents
class effects (slide 22)…
• Hemorrhagic cystitis due to
acrolein toxicity to bladder
epithelium
Mitigation: Hydration + Mesna
• Bone marrow suppression
• Congestive heart failure
Mesna conjugates and
inactivates acrolein →
May exacerbate effects of other
 toxicity risk
cardiotoxic medications and
underlying myocardial dysfunction.
• Arrhythmias
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Check your knowledge
What class of drugs induces cell death by nucleophilic attack on DNA bases, esp. the N7
guanine, leading to inter- and intrastrand cross-linking, abnormal base pairing, miscoding,
and strand breakage.
• The alkylating agents. DNA damage activates of DNA repair systems that create DNA
strand breaks by repair enzymes, which activates the apopototic pathway.
What cellular mechanisms are essential for cell death?
• Recognition of the adduct
• Intact MMR and DNA damage repair systems to induce DNA strand breaks by repair
enzymes
• Normal p53 gene and activation of checkpoint proteins
• Resistance develops rapidly when a drug is used as a single agent
What is the active cytotoxic metabolite of cyclophosphamide (and ifosfamide)?
• Phosphoramide mustard: cyclophosphamide→ hydroxycyclophosphamide→
aldophosphamide → phosphoramide mustard
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the name of the urotoxic metabolite and how can the toxicity be mitigated?
• Acrolein toxicity to bladder epithelium causes hemorrhagic cystitis.
Mesna conjugates and inactivates acrolein, decreasing the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis
What is a mechanisms of tumor resistance to cyclophosphamide and ifosphamide?
• Increased expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase increases the rate of metabolism of
aldophosphamide to inactive carboxyphosphamide.
Increased expression glutathione transferase detoxifies alkylating intermediates
Cyclophosphamide is used in the treatment of what categories of cancers?
• Numerous solid and blood tumors and immunosuppression in autoimmune diseases.
List the common and serious toxicities of cyclophosphamide.
• bone marrow suppression, liver tox., cardiotox, lung tox, malignancies and class tox.
27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Platinum Coordination Complexes
Cisplatin
Carboplatin
Oxaliplatin
chloride ligand
oxalate ligand
cyclohexane ligand
28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
http://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/US7759488B2/US07759488-20100720-C00002.png
1. Passive diffusion and Cu+
active transporter →
2. Aquation (activation) →
Above:
http://www.google.com/patents/US7759488
3. Reacts with purine – mainly
Below:
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 4, 307-320
N7 guanine – either on the
(April 2005) doi:10.1038/nrd1691
same or neighboring strands http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v4/n4/fig_tab/
nrd1691_F3.html
of DNA →
• replication/transcription
inhibition
• cell cycle arrest
• strand breaks
• apoptosis – if p53 and other
checkpoint proteins are intact
Platinum analogs also bind
nuclear and cytoplasmic
proteins.
Cell cycle phase: Nonspecific
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Resistance to Platinum Analogs
Decreased uptake Efflux Inactivation Repair
CTR1 copper ATP7A and  intracellular levels of Overexpression of:
transporter ATP7B copper 1. Glutathione, 1. Nucleotide
1.Down- transporters 2. Metallothionein, excision repair
regulation, and Physiologic function: 3. Other sulfhydryls components,
removal of excess
2.  expression These molecules bind 2. Base-excision
copper from the cell
Decreased uptake to and inactivate the repair,
is the predominant drugs. 3. Mismatch repair
mechanism of (MMR),
resistance 4. double-strand-
repair breaks
Cross-resistance may occur between cisplatin and carboplatin
Tumors resistant by MMR are not cross-resistant to oxaliplatin
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Platinum Analogs Mechanisms of Resistance
 Influx, Inactivation, and  Efflux
Nature Reviews Cancer 7, 573-584 (August 2007); doi:10.1038/nrc2167
http://www.nature.com/nrc/journal/v7/n8/fig_tab/nrc2167_F1.html
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Platinum Analogs Mechanisms of Resistance After DNA Binding
Nature Reviews Cancer 7, 573-584 (August 2007); doi:10.1038/nrc2167
32
http://www.nature.com/nrc/journal/v7/n8/fig_tab/nrc2167_F1.html
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Platinum Analogs
Common IV, poor CNS penetration Synergy with radiation therapy
features renal clearance Interaction: T before P
dosage adjustment in renal impairment Administer taxane before platinum to limit
myelosuppression and increase efficacy
Cisplatin Covalent binding to plasma proteins Major antitumor activity in a broad range of
Nonenzymatic inactivation (unbound fraction) solid tumors
Vigorous saline hydration
t½ up to 5 days
terminal
Carboplatin Less reactive Broad-spectrum activity against a wide range
Less renal and GI toxicity and vigorous IV of solid tumors
hydration is not required (but recommended)
Oxaliplatin Highly reactive Colorectal and gastric cancer
Cytotoxicity does not depend on active • Oxaliplatin is a component of first-line
mismatch repair system for efficacy. chemotherapy of advanced colorectal
(Bulky ligands create a different distortion cancer (FOLFOX)
pattern of DNA helix.)
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Dose-limiting toxicities and other major toxicities
(in red)
Reminder: Being aware of major toxicities is important for optimizing the patient’s therapy.
Patients should be monitored for them, and the toxicities should be mitigated, if possible.
Cisplatin Highly emetogenic – Vomiting: persistent, acute and delayed
neurotoxicity; ototoxicity; myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy
Nephrotoxicity vigorous chloride diuresis with normal saline + diuretic to reduce toxicity
Carboplatin
More tolerable – Toxicities of cisplatin but less severe.
Myelosuppression
Oxaliplatin
Hypersensitivity / Anaphylaxis – can occur within minutes
Toxicities similar to cisplatin but less severe
Peripheral neuropathy acute (exacerbated by cold) and delayed progressive neuropathy
All: Leukemia, pulmonary fibrosis months to years later
34
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Check your knowledge
How does the mechanism of the platinum analogs compare with the mechanism of the
alkylating agents?
• Alkylating agents: Nucleophilic attack on DNA→ cross-linking→ activate DNA repair
mechanisms→ apoptosis
• Platinum analogs: Diffuse through copper transporter→ aquation to positively charged
molecules→ nucleophilic attack on DNA → cross-linking→ activate DNA repair
mechanisms→ apoptosis. Platinum analogs also bind nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins
• Apoptosis requires that p53 and other checkpoint proteins are intact.
What are the main mechanisms of resistance to platinum analogs?
• Efflux (ATP7A/B copper exporters)
• Inactivation (metalloproteinases, glutathione-S-transferase, sulfhydryls)
• Loss of DNA mismatch repair and decreased apoptosis, and other mechanisms.
35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the definition of dose-limiting toxicities?
• Specific adverse effects of a drug that are severe enough to prevent an increase in the dose.
They are critical in determining the maximum tolerated dose during clinical trials, especially in
oncology.
What are the dose-limiting toxicities of cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin?
• Cisplatin: nephrotoxicity; carboplatin: bone marrow suppression; oxaliplatin: peripheral
neuropathy, acute and delayed (progressive)
In sequential administration of a platinum analog with paclitaxel or docetaxel, why is the taxane
administered first?
• To limit myelosuppression (taxane) and increase efficacy.
• Pharmacokinetic data during clinical trials with paclitaxel administered in sequential infusion
with cisplatin demonstrated a decrease in paclitaxel clearance when paclitaxel was
administered after cisplatin.
• The mechanism has not been identified.
• Administer paclitaxel before cisplatin, when given as sequential infusions, to limit toxicity.
Problems associated with other taxane/platinum combinations are possible, although
unsubstantiated. Administering the taxane derivative before the platinum derivative seems
prudent.
36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Antimetabolites
S phase of cell cycle
Definition: An antimetabolite is a substance that is similar in structure to a metabolite
or enzymatic substrate, but interferes with the normal division and function of cells
• Antimetabolites are analogs and competitive antagonists of the natural substrates
– folic acid, pyrimidines, purines.
• Antimetabolites inhibit nucleotide synthesis, which depletes the pool of
nucleotides necessary for RNA and DNA synthesis.
• Antimetabolites induce cell death in rapidly dividing cells by interfering with DNA
synthesis (S phase of the cell cycle).
37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Antimetabolites Class Toxicities – Acute and Delayed
Like the alkylating agents, antimetabolites can cause:
• Bone marrow suppression – anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia
• GI toxicity – nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mucositis, stomatitis
• Hepatotoxicity – ranging from elevated serum transaminases to liver failure
• Pulmonary toxicity – pneumonitis, interstitial fibrosis
• Nephrotoxicity – impaired kidney function and interstitial toxicity as drug deposits
in the kidney parenchyma and tubular epithelial cells
• Neurotoxicity – peripheral neuropathy
• Cutaneous reactions – rash, hand-foot syndrome, alopecia
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Folate Antagonists
Methotrexate
Pemetrexed
Pralatrexate
Folic acid is an essential dietary factor (vitamin B9)
converted by enzymatic reduction to FH cofactors that
4
provide methyl groups for the synthesis of thymidylate
and purines, precursors of RNA and DNA.
Folic acid is essential for DNA synthesis and repair,
amino acid metabolism, red blood cell formation, and
neural tube development in the fetus.
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Methotrexate (MTX) Pharmacokinetic Properties
Property Comment
A IV administration for cancer treatment; Oral, IM, subQ for weekly nononcologic
intrathecal (IT) for ALL immunosuppressant indications
D
Taken up by reduced folate transporter Drugs that displace methotrexate from albumin →
~50% plasma protein bound  risk of severe myelosuppression
Narrow therapeutic window MTX is a Substrate of BCRP, P-gp, OATP (liver)
BCRP: breast cancer resistance protein, an efflux
Distributes in body water
transporter expressed in brain, GI tract, placenta, and testes
Poor CNS penetration
and eliminates substrates from liver via biliary tract and via
Sustained concentrations in liver/kidney transport into the proximal tubule.
M Intracellular polyglutamation Active MTX-PG accumulates intracellularly and is
Low intestinal and hepatic metabolism slowly eliminated (ion trapping inside cell)
E Urine, 80%-90% unchanged drug Dose adjustments for renal impairment
t½ Age and dose-dependent Children: 1-6 h (ALL treatment)
Adults: 8-15 h (cancer treatment)
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
MTX and MTX-PG
Cell cycle: S phase
Mechanisms
1. MTX / MTX-PG block DHFR →  FH synthesis.
4
 FH4 levels reduces synthesis of thymidylate and
purine nucleotides necessary of RNA and DNA
synthesis.
2. MTX / MTX-PGs levels increase behind blocked DHFR
→ Inhibition of additional targets including TS, GART,
AICAR transformylase

Cell cycle arrest, activation of p53, apoptosis

Cell death in S phase
DHFR: dihydrofolate reductase catalyzes conversion of folic acid to FH
4
TS: thymidylate synthase, synthesis of thymidylate (thymidine monophosphate, TMP)
GART: glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase, intermediate in purine synthesis
41
AICAR: aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide, intermediate in IMP synthesis
--- SLIDE 42 ---
MTX Resistance
Impaired transport of drug into the cells
Folic acid and analogs are polar. They are taken into cells by transport systems.
MTX, ralitrexed, and pemetrexed are taken up by reduced folate transporters.
 Expression of drug efflux transporter of the MRP class
MRP=multidrug resistance-associated protein-1
Production of altered DHFR with reduced affinity for methotrexate
 Concentrations of DHFR through gene amplification or altered gene regulation
 Ability to synthesize methotrexate polyglutamates
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Methotrexate has many therapeutic uses.
Oncology uses: Broad spectrum: solid and liquid tumors, including childhood ALL
Autoimmune disease: Weekly low dose for immunosuppressive effects
Abortifacient: Tubular ectopic pregnancy
Methotrexate drug-specific toxicities, in addition to class toxicities
Bone marrow suppression Neurotoxicity with high IV dose:
Mucositis, stomatitis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea • paralysis, palsy, seizure, coma
Hepatotoxicity is cumulative and progressive • arachnoiditis with intrathecal admin
Pneumonitis can occur at any time • demyelinating encephalitis with radiation
Reproductive toxicities
Pregnancy: Fetal loss - abortifacient Impaired fertility- defective oogenesis /
spermatogenesis
Leucovorin rescue: Converted to active methylene-FH → “rescue” host cells from:
4
folinic acid Bone marrow toxicity, hepatotoxicity, mucositis/stomatitis
Leucovorin does not reverse neurotoxicity or pulmonary toxicity. 43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Pyrimidine analogs
Fluoropyrimidine
uracil
Antimetabolites
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)
Capecitabine
(oral prodrug of 5-FU)
5-fluorouracil
Floxuridine (FUdR)
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Pharmacokinetics
5-FLUOROURACIL
Activation Enzymatic ribosylation and phosphorylation of 5-FU to the active
nucleotides F-UMP and F-dUMP
Distribution Throughout body, including CSF and brain tissue
Metabolism 5-FU dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) → 5-6-dihydrofluorouracil
DPD is found in liver, intestinal mucosa, tumor and other tissues.
Excretion Partially metabolized to CO , which is excreted by the lung
2
Urine, 5% unchanged drug
t½ 6-20 minutes → Administered by continuous IV infusion
plasma
Biologic t½: prolonged, tissue dependent
CAPECITABINE Oral prodrug of 5-FU; converted primarily in the liver to inactive
intermediate compounds, then to 5-FU in the tumor
Pharmacogenomics Patients with a compete deficiency of DPD (autosomal recessive trait) are
at risk of severe, excessive toxicity. This enzyme deficiency is seen in up
to 5% of cancer patients.
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
5-FU Mechanisms of Action – “Thymine-less death”
(DPD)
1. 5-FU → → FUMP → FUDP ribonucleotide reductase → FdUDP 
FdUMP → FdUMP-folate-TS 3-way complex → inhibits TS
activity; thymidylate synthesis is inhibited
2. FdUDP → FdUTP → incorporated into DNA → DNA strand
breaks
3. 5-FU → FUMP → FUDP → FUTP → incorporated into RNA
→ RNA processing and function is disrupted
⎯5-FU cytotoxicity is thought to be mediated by the
combined effects of both DNA- and RNA-mediated events.⎯
46
Goodman and Gilman 12e Figure 61-9; 61-10
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Resistance Therapeutic uses Toxicities
Resistance Therapeutic Uses Toxicities
Broad spectrum, solid tumors
Decreased activation First line regimen: Class toxicities:
• Cancer cells that do not Metastatic colorectal cancer • Bone marrow suppression,
convert 5-FU to 5-FdUMP Synergy: FOLFOX or FOLFIRI GI, CNS neurotoxicity
Altered substrate Folinic acid⎯5-FU⎯thymidylate Hand-foot syndrome
• Altered or increased form ternary complex • especially with capecitabine
thymidylate synthase levels • Palmar-plantar erythema:
Topical 5-FU:
desquamation, pain, and
Actinic keratosis sensitivity to touch
Coronary artery vasospasm
Basal cell carcinoma, superficial
leading to cardiac ischemia
Squamous cell carcinoma, in situ
• Angina, MI, arrhythmia,
Penile carcinoma, in situ
heart failure
Fol: Folinic acid (leucovorin)
• Rare, can be fatal.
F: 5-FU
OX: Oxaliplatin
47
IRI: Irinotecan
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Palmar-Plantar Erythema / Desquamation
Stomatitis induced by chemotherapy
(painful erosions and ulcerations)
48
Wikipedia: Chemotheray-induced acral erythema
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Pyrimidine Analogs
Cytidine Analogs
Cytarabine (Ara-C)
, an aribinoside
Cytidine Cytarabine
Gemcitabine
(difluouro analog of deoxycytidine) arabinose ring instead
of a ribose ring
Azacitidine
Decitabine
Deoxycytidine Gemcitabine
--- SLIDE 50 ---
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/C_chemical_structure.png/220px-C_chemical_structure.png
Cytarabine / Gemcitabine Class Pharmacokinetics
• Parenteral
• Distributes to CNS
• Extensive degradation by cytidine deaminase to inactive uracil metabolites
− Primarily in liver
− Cytidine deaminase activity is high in many normal tissues
• Urine as inactive uracil metabolites
• t½ dependent on dose and duration
 Efficacy: Cytidine deaminase activity is lower in AML cells and other human
tumors.
 Due to the formation of intracellular nucleotides, which become incorporated
into DNA, the effects persist for many hours.
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Cytarabine Mechanisms of Action and Resistance
Mechanisms of Action:
Enters cells via nucleoside transporter →
Cytarabine deoxycytidine kinase → Ara-CMP → Ara-CDP → Ara-CTP
1. competitive inhibition of:
A. DNA polymerase-α (blocks DNA synthesis), and
B. DNA polymerase-β (prevents DNA repair)
2. incorporation into DNA → blocks chain elongation → activation of checkpoint
kinases → apoptosis
Mechanisms of Resistance
•  Conversion to active form: Loss of deoxycytidine kinase (primary mechanism)
•  Transport: Reduced intracellular levels of cytosine analog
•  Deactivation: Increased concentration of deactivation enzymes, cytidine
deaminase and others may be involved
51
--- SLIDE 52 ---
Cytarabine Therapeutic Uses and Toxicities
Although structurally related, deoxycytidine analogs have different
spectrums of action.
Cytarabine
AML: drug of choice with daunorubicin or idarubicin
Other leukemias and high-grade lymphomas
Cytarabine has no activity in solid tumors
Toxicities (typical of antimetabolites class)
• Myelosuppression: acute severe leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia
with megaloblastic changes
• Dyspnea, pulmonary infiltrates; can be fatal
• Mucositis; nausea/vomiting; rash; alopecia
Cytarabine
• Cerebellar toxicity, high dose or intrathecal (ataxia; slurred speech)
distributes
• Cerebral toxicity, high dose or intrathecal (seizures, coma) to the
CNS
52
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Purine Analogs
 6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP)
6-Thioguanine (6-TG)
http://www.mpbio.com/images/product-images/molecular-structure/05205562.png
http://www.mpbio.com/images/product-images/molecular-structure/02190691.png
Fludarabine
Cladribine
Pentostatin
guanine
6-mercaptopurine
53
--- SLIDE 54 ---
• 6-MP hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl
Cell cycle:
S phase transferase (HGPRT) → 6-thioinosinic acid →
6-TIMP → → 6-TG nucleotides →
1. TIMP inhibits
– several enzymes of de novo purine
nucleotide biosynthesis, and
– conversion of IMP to purine nucleotides
2. 6-TGN incorporation into DNA → strand
breaks and base mispairing
Pharmacogenetic variability:
• TPMT slow metabolizers
Drug interaction:
• Xanthine oxidase inhibitors
TPMT: thiopurine methyltransferase
XO: xanthine oxidase
TIMP: thioinosine monophosphate Increased risk of 6-MP
IMPD: inosine-5-monophosphate dehydrogenase
toxicity
GMPS: guanosine monophosphate synthase
6-TGN: 6-thioguanine nucleotides
(potentially severe)
6-MeMPN: 6-methylmercaptopurine nucleotides
54
RxList: http://www.rxlist.com/imuran-drug/clinical-pharmacology.htm
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Mercaptopurine
Therapeutic Uses Toxicities
• Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) • Bone marrow suppression
• Component of various regimens • Hepatotoxicity
Immunosuppressant • GI symptoms
Potent T cell suppression • Risk of infection
• Crohn’s disease
Drug interaction
Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase → shunts 6-MP to formation of more toxic
metabolite
 Decrease 6-MP dose to ~25% of usual dose
55
--- SLIDE 56 ---
Check your knowledge
What structural and mechanistic features are common to the antimetabolites class?
• They are analogs of natural substrates – folic acid, pyrimidines, or purines.
• All antimetabolites interfere with DNA and RNA synthesis by mimicking the natural
substrates (metabolites).
• They inhibit nucleotide synthesis, which depletes the pool of nucleotides necessary for
RNA and DNA synthesis in proliferating cells→ cell cycle arrest in S phase→ cell death
How does inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase lead to cell cycle arrest?
• MTX and MTX-PG block DHFR→ prevents conversion of folic acid (FH ) to active FH ,
2 4
which reduces levels of cofactor FH → reduces one-carbon transfers needed for
4
synthesis of thymidylate and purines→ impairs RNA and DNA synthesis
• Accumulation of MTX and MTX-PG behind blocked DHFR→ inhibition of additional
targets, including thymidylate synthase and enzymes in de novo purine synthesis.
• Cell cycle arrest, activation of p53, apoptosis→ cell death in S phase.
56
--- SLIDE 57 ---
Check your knowledge
How does leucovorin reduce bone marrow, liver, and GI toxicity of methotrexate therapy?
• Leucovorin (folinic acid) administered after MTX therapy supplies reduced folate,
bypassing blocked DHFR and allowing normal cells to synthesize and repair DNA
What is the mechanism of action for fluorouracil?
• 5-Fluorouracil is an analog of uracil, a pyrimidine. 5-FU is enzymatically converted to 5-
fluorouridine triphosphate (ribosylation and phosphorylation). 5-FUTP is incorporated
into RNA, inhibiting RNA synthesis.
• 5-FU is also enzymatically converted to 5-FdUMP, which inhibits thymidylate synthase,
which prevents the synthesis of deoxythymidine triphosphate, which is necessary for
DNA synthesis.
• They inhibit nucleotide synthesis, which depletes the pool of nucleotides necessary for
RNA and DNA synthesis in proliferating cells→ cell cycle arrest in S phase→ cell death
57
--- SLIDE 58 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the function of leucovorin in the FOLFOX regimen for colorectal cancer treatment?
• FOLFOX = folinic acid, 5-FU-oxaliplatin. 5-FU inhibits thymidylate synthase. Leucovorin
stabilizes binding of 5-FU to thymidylate synthase, increasing the inhibition of the
enzyme and efficacy of the FOLFOX and FOLFIRI regimens.
What drug is a cytidine analog activated to the triphosphate deoxy form, which inhibits
DNA polymerases and causes chain termination, and, with daunorubicin, is a first-line
regimen for AML?
• Cytarabine. Ara-CTP blocks DNA polymerase (DNA synthesis inhibition) and DNA
polymerase- (DNA synthesis inhibition). It is also incorporated into the growing DNA
chain, terminating synthesis and triggering apoptosis.
Pharmacogenomic poor metabolizers are at increased risk of mercaptopurine toxicities.
What is the involved enzyme?
• Patients with reduced and deficient thiopurine methyltransferase activity have reduced
metabolism of 6-MP. Therefore, higher concentration of 6-MP is shunted to the toxic
nucleotide synthesis pathway.
58
--- SLIDE 59 ---
Summary the mechanisms of the antimetabolites
Folate analogs Block DHFR, thymidylate synthase and early enzymes in purine synthesis
blocks RNA and DNA synthesis; cell cycle arrest
Fluoropyrimidines Incorporation into RNA blocks RNA synthesis; inhibition of thymidylate
synthesis inhibits DNA synthesis; cell cycle arrest
Cytidine analogs Inhibition of DNA polymerase (by cytarabine):
Triphosphorylated deoxycytidine analogs compete with dCTP for incorporation
into DNA by DNA polymerase, which blocks elongation of growing DNA strand,
leading to DNA breaks with activation of p53 and apoptosis if breaks are not
repaired.
(Other cytidine analogs have slightly different mechanisms.)
Thiopurines Enzymatic conversion to thio-purines (toxic nucleotides), which are
incorporated in DNA and RNA synthesis, leading to cell cycle arrest in the S
phase
Cytidine analogs Activation to triphophorylated molecule, which inhibits DNA polymerases and
terminates strand elongation and triggers apoptosis by incorporation into the
growing DNA strand. Other cytidine analogs have additional actions.
59
--- SLIDE 60 ---
Antitumor Antibiotics
Anthracyclines
Doxorubicin
Daunorubicin
Idarubicin
Epirubicin
Valrubicin
Cell cycle: nonspecific
Streptomyces peucetius produces anthracyclines
as a secondary metabolite, which is harvested for
use as a chemotherapeutic agent.
Other antitumor antibiotics: By Docwarhol - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.ph
Mitoxantrone, Bleomycin, Mitomycin, Dactinomycin
p?curid=64416332
60
--- SLIDE 61 ---
PK Doxorubicin
A I.V.
Protein binding ~75%
P-glycoprotein substrate
D Widely distributed
Does not cross BBB
Accumulates in tissues
M CYP2D6, 3A4 Inhibits several CYPs including CYP3A4
E Feces: Biliary excretion, unchanged drug and metabolites
Multiphasic; t½ range 20 to 48 h (age and gender differences)
t½ terminal
Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin: ~55 h
http://medicinesdelivery.com/image/cache/data/products/doxorubicin50mg25ml-500x500.jpg
 Anthracyclines turn urine red
rubicin → ruby → red
61
--- SLIDE 62 ---
Anthracyclines Mechanisms of Action
Topoisomerase II Intercalation
inhibition in the DNA Free radical formation
3-way complex: Insert between adjacent Semiquinone and oxygen
base pairs free radicals
Drug ⎯ topo II ⎯ DNA
 (iron-dependent, enzyme-
complex
mediated reductive process)
local uncoiling

H O and -OH radicals

Irreparable DNA breaks 2 2

1.Blocks DNA and RNA

attack DNA and oxidize DNA
synthesis and repair, and
apoptosis
bases
2.Causes DNA strand

scission
single strand DNA
scission
+
damage to proteins and
http://en.wikipedia.org
membranes
62
/wiki/Doxorubicin
--- SLIDE 63 ---
Anthracyclines Therapeutic Uses and Resistance mechanisms
Doxorubicin therapeutic uses: Broad spectrum
Wide range of solid tumors, lymphomas, multiple myeloma, sarcomas
Multidrug resistance is common
1. cellular export of drug by MRP transporter family and by the closely related
breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) transporters
2.  glutathione peroxidase activity
3.  activity or mutation of topoisomerase II
4.  repair of DNA strand breaks
MRP: multidrug resistance-associated protein
63
--- SLIDE 64 ---
Anthracyclines Adverse Effects
Cardiotoxicity Pericarditis-myocarditis syndrome
the most distinctive Chronic: cumulative dose-related, irreversible,
toxicity progression to cardiomyopathy and acute left
ventricular failure
Cardiomyopathy is proportional to the cumulative
exposure.
Major dose-limiting effects Myelosuppression (major)
Mucositis, stomatitis
Neurotoxicity Peripheral and CNS
Injection-related Extravasation / severe local vesicular effects
Radiation recall Severe local skin reaction in irradiated tissues
Malignancy Leukemogenic; myelodysplastic syndrome
64
--- SLIDE 65 ---
Upper left: Radiation dermatitis: acute, recall phenomenon
This patient had breast cancer. She had a lumpectomy, methotrexate, and
x-ray therapy and developed painful erythema and erosions at the
irradiated site.
Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatoloty, 7e >
Chapter 227. Cytotoxic and Antimetabolic Agents
Figure 10-29
Upper right: Reactivation of solar erythema 2 days after high-dose
methotrexate administration to a young woman
Severe tissue necrosis after extravasation of doxorubicin with choriocarcinoma.
Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 8e Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 8e >
Figure 227-9 Chapter 227. Cytotoxic and Antimetabolic Agents
Figure 227-8
65
--- SLIDE 66 ---
Anthracyclines Drug Interactions
Doxorubicin + Trastuzumab both cause cardiac toxicity
 risk of cardiac toxicity
Paclitaxel + Anthracycline Paclitaxel competition for CYP3A4 and P-
glycoprotein → Paclitaxel increases anthracycline
serum concentration
 risk of anthracyline toxicity
➢ Practice Point: The anthracycline should be administered prior to the taxane.
“A before T”
Metabolic and transport related Inducers / inhibitors / substrates of CYP2D6,
CYP3A4, P-glycoprotein
66
--- SLIDE 67 ---
Natural Products
Mitotic inhibitors
• Vinca Alkaloids
• Taxanes
Topoisomerase inhibitors
• Camptothecin Analogs
• Epipodophyllotoxins
67
--- SLIDE 68 ---
Vinca Alkaloids:
Vincristine
Vinblastine
Vinorelbine
(semisynthetic)
Catharanthus roseus
Madigascar Periwinkle
The leaves are the source of vinca alkaloids,
vinblastine and vincristine
Figure: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catharanthus_roseus#/media/File:Catharanthus_roseus24_08_2012_(1).JPG 68
--- SLIDE 69 ---
Vincristine pharmacology
PK IVPgp substrate, poor penetration of CSFCYP3A4 metabt½ 20-45 h
Intrathecal admin contraindicated
MOA Inhibition of microtubule polymerization arresting the cell in metaphase (next slide)
Resistance MDR resistance is common  Multidrug resistant tumor cells display cross-resistance
to vinca alkaloids, the epipodophyllotoxins, anthracyclines, and taxanes.
• Expression of efflux pumps MDR, MRP, BCRP, Pgp
• Mutations in β-tubulin or  expression of the β-tubulin
Uses Vinca alkaloids have different activities and therapeutic uses
Vincristine: Pediatric and adult leukemias, lymphomas, solid tumors
➢ Treatment of choice to induce remission in childhood leukemia
Vincristine Neurotoxicity (main dose-limiting toxicity, can be severe)
toxicities Peripheral neuropathy, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, motor dysfunction
Constipation: can be severe with abdominal pain / obstruction
Vesicant  Extravasation
CYP3A4 and P-gp related drug interactions
69
--- SLIDE 70 ---
Vinca alkaloids bind to -tubulin
and block polymerization with
alpha tubulin.
Cells are blocked in mitosis.
(M phase)  Apoptosis
Inhibition of microtubule function results in
mitotic arrest in metaphase and brings cell
division to a halt, which then leads to cell death.
70
--- SLIDE 71 ---
Taxanes
Paclitaxel
Nabpaclitaxel
nanoparticle
albumin-bound paclitaxel
Docetaxel Taxus baccata (European yew)
Paclitaxel is isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew.
Cabazitaxel
Docetaxel is derived from needles of the European yew.
Cell division arrest in M phase of cell cycle
71
--- SLIDE 72 ---
Pharmacokinetics: Taxanes
Paclitaxel Docetaxel
• Pgp substrate, extensive protein binding • Linear clearance
• Hepatic CYP2C8, CYP3A4 metabolism • Hepatic CYP3A4 metabolism
• Fecal excretion of metabolites • Pgp substrate
• t½ 13-52 hours • Extensive protein binding
terminal
Nonlinear clearance (albumin, alpha-1-acid gp, lipoproteins)
likely due to ethanol-polyoxyethylated castor oil • fecal excretion of metabolites
diluent • t½ ~11 hours
terminal
Nabpaclitaxel: Cabazitaxel
Nanopartical albumin bound paclitaxel Lower affinity for MDR proteins
Soluble in aqueous solution Hepatic CYP3A4 metabolism
Higher serum concentrations / increased clearance t½ 95 h
→ similar systemic exposure
Note: High potential for CYP-mediated drug interactions.
72
--- SLIDE 73 ---
Therapeutic Uses
Taxanes bind -tubulin with high
Paclitaxel
affinity.
Broad spectrum of
Nabpaclitaxel
High affinity binding to -tubulin solid tumors
Docetaxel
stabilizes microtubules and
Cabazitaxel
prevents microtubule disassembly.
Treatment of castration-resistant

metastatic prostate cancer
Defects in mitotic spindle
assembly, chromosome Resistance:
 Expression of MDR genes
segregation, and cell division
Mutations in β-tubulin
structures derived from
Toxicities
microtubules accumulate.
• Myelosuppression with neutropenia

• Peripheral neuropathy (“glove-stocking”)
Cell cycle arrest
• Radiation recall: Severe reaction in

irradiated skin
Apoptosis
• Fluid retention, ascites, general edema
• Extravasation / severe vesicular effects
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, • Administer anthracycline before taxane
7e, 2019 Chapter 35 Anticancer Drugs 73
--- SLIDE 74 ---
Chemotherapy‐induced peripheral neurotoxicity: A critical analysis
CA A Cancer J Clinicians, Volume: 63, Issue: 6, Pages: 419-437, First published: 11 November 2013, DOI: (10.3322/caac.21204)
--- SLIDE 75 ---
CAMPTOTHECIN
Camptothecin Analogs
Chiral center: C20
Irinotecan
Topotecan IRINOTECAN
Arrest in S phase of cell cycle
C10
Requirements for biologic activity:
Carboxylesterase site
1. S-conformation of the chiral center
TOPOTECAN
at C20 in the lactone ring
2. C10 hydroxyl group
C10
• Irinotecan is a prodrug converted to
active SN-38 by carboxylesterase
Camptotheca accuminata
• Topotecan is not a prodrug
Camptothecins are extracted from7 5bark.
--- SLIDE 76 ---
Closed-ring form is active.  Open-ring form is inactive.
In biologic fluids, active SN-38 and topotecan lactone
are hydrolyzed to inactive open ring carboxylate forms.

Active closed-ring lactone  Inactive open-ring configuration
dynamic equilibrium
Irinotecan Topotecan
1. Irinotecan carboxyesterase → active SN-38 No conversion to active lactone ring form
2. SN-38 → UGT1A1 → glucuronide • Plasma / hepatic metabolism → inactivate
metabolite (inactive) metabolite
UGT1A1 is not involved
Pharmacogenomics and Irinotecan:
UGT1A1*28 → deficient UGT activity → irinotecan toxicity, especially diarrhea, can be severe.
Dose reduction is recommended in patients with the homozygous UGT1A1*28 allele.
76
--- SLIDE 77 ---
Camptothecins Mechanism of Action
Drug-topoisomerase I-DNA
1. Drug binds to topoisomerase I-nicked DNA
ternary complex
complex.
2. DNA strand resealing is prevented.
3. Single strand breaks in DNA accumulate.
4. Eventually, the replication fork collides with
the complex → irreversible double-strand
DNA break → arrest in S phase → cell
death.
Mechanisms of Resistance: not well understood
• Drug efflux
• Topoisomerase I alterations
• Other potential mechanisms
http://www.australianprescriber.com/magazine/25/5/108/10/
Figure 1 (Black oval with C = Camptothecin)
77
--- SLIDE 78 ---
Camptothecins Adverse effects
Treatment of metastatic and recurrent
Bone marrow suppression – Dose-limiting: Both
and progressive tumors
Neutropenia can be severe and potentially fatal
Irinotecan
especially when used in combination with other
Numerous solid tumors drugs that cause hematological toxicity
Metastatic colorectal cancer FOLFIRI
Diarrhea – Dose-limiting: Irinotecan
Folinic acid – 5-FU – Irinotecan
Diarrhea may be severe with
Topotecan
electrolyte disturbances, dehydration, and
Recurrent ovarian cancer complicated by colitis, ulceration, bleeding
Small cell lung cancer
Cholinergic sx may occur w. higher doses
Cervical cancer
Typical adverse effects of chemo drugs
Ewing’s sarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma mucositis, nausea, vomiting, pulmonary toxicity,
CNS malignancy renal toxicity, etc.
78
--- SLIDE 79 ---
Epipodophyllotoxins
Etoposide
Therapeutic uses Toxicities
Podophyllum peltatum
Numerous hematologic cancers Myelosuppression American Mayapple
(Mandrake)
and solid tumors, including Nausea/vomiting
Epipodophyllotoxins are
small cell lung cancer and Mucositis
extracted from the roots.
testicular cancer Alopecia
(with bleomycin and cisplatin) Secondary acute leukemia
79
--- SLIDE 80 ---
Epipodophyllotoxins Mechanisms
1. Formation of a ternary complex
drug-DNA-topoisomerase II complex
2. Inhibition of topoisomerase II → prevents resealing
of double-strand breaks
3. The enzyme remains bound to the free end of the
broken DNA strand → accumulation of DNA breaks
→ arrest → apoptosis
Cell cycle arrest in late S and G2 phase
Resistance Mechanisms
1. Efflux:
2. Topoisomerase II alterations
2. Mutations in p53 tumor suppressor gene
• P-53 is required for inducing apoptosis
Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology 8e Figure 37.30 80
--- SLIDE 81 ---
Check your knowledge
A broad spectrum chemotherapy causes irreversible cardiotoxicity that can lead to left
ventricular dysfunction, cardiomyopathy, and heart failure, apparently resulting from
generation of free radicals and lipid peroxidation. What is the mechanism of action of this
drug?
• 1) DNA intercalation, 2) inhibition of topoisomerase II which inhibits DNA and RNA
synthesis, DNA repair, and results in DNA fragmentation, 3) generation of free radicals,
which damage DNA, membrane functions.
What are the other dose-limiting toxicities of this drug?
• Bone marrow suppression, mucositis/stomatitis
A patient with a history of rhabdosarcoma treated with a chemotherapy regimen that
includes vincristine continues to suffer with painful pins and needles sensation, motor
weakness and muscle cramps in his upper and lower extremities. What is the adverse
effect?
• Sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, which is a dose-limiting toxicity of vincristine.
81
--- SLIDE 82 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the difference between the mechanisms of action of the vinca alkaloids and the
taxanes?
• Vinca alkaloids inhibit polymerization in microtubules
• Taxanes stabilize microtubules and prevent depolymerization
• Both suppress spindle microtubule function → cell cycle arrest → apoptosis
A patient diagnosed with breast cancer receives paclitaxel intravenous infusion once
weekly every three weeks as a component of her adjuvant chemotherapy regimen that
includes doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide.
What are the dose-limiting toxicities of each drug in the regimen?
• Paclitaxel: bone marrow suppression and peripheral neuropathy (sensorimotor, glove-
stocking)
• Doxorubicin: cardiotoxicity/cardiomyopathy (cumulative dose); bone marrow
suppression
• Cyclophosphamide: bone marrow suppression and hemorrhagic cystitis (due to
acrolein metabolites)
82
--- SLIDE 83 ---
Check your knowledge
A patient with KRAS mutated metastatic colorectal cancer is given the FOLFIRI regimen. What
does “IRI” represent and what is its dose-limiting side effect?
• IRI = irinotecan, a prodrug converted to toxic SN-38, a topoisomerase I inhibitor prevents
resealing of DNA strand, leading to strand breaks and cell cycle arrest in the S phase.
• DNA strand breaks causes cell cycle arrest in late S and G2 phase.
What are other dose-limiting toxicities of this drug?
• Bone marrow suppression, mucositis/stomatitis
A28-year-old male diagnosed with testicular cancer is treated with the first-line regimen, BEP
regimen. E represents a drug that prevents resealing of the double strand breaks in DNA
ultimately leading to cell cycle arrest in S-G2 phase. What is the name of the drug?
• Etoposide inhibits of topo II by forming drug-DNA-topoisomerase II complex, which prevents
resealing of double-strand breaks, causing irreversible double-strand breaks.
• Accumulation of DNA double strand breaks causes cell cycle arrest in late S and G2 phases
and apoptosis.
83
--- SLIDE 84 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the mechanisms of action of the other two drugs in the BEP regimen?
(I don’t expect you to know the answer so I will tell you because it is Boards Relevant.)
• B=Bleomycin, an antitumor antibiotic that forms a complex with DNA and iron: DNA-B-
Fe2+, which is oxidized to DNA-B-Fe3+. Superoxide and hydroxyl radicals are formed,
which attack phosphodiesterase bonds of DNA, resulting in strand breaks and
chromosomal aberrations. Bleomycin causes pulmonary fibrosis (“bleomycin lung”).
• P=platinum=cisplatin. Chlorine molecules on the structure are replace by water
molecules (aquation) in the low-chloride environment inside the tumor cell, which then
attacks purine residues on DNA, especially the N7 of guanine, leading to inter- and
intrastrand breaks and miscoding – apoptosis (if recognized by p53 and other
checkpoint proteins). Nephrotoxicity is the dose-limiting toxicity.
What is an important mechanism of resistance common to the anthracyclines and the
antitumor natural products?
• Efflux via upregulated expression of efflux pumps: multidrug resistance (MDR) pumps
including MDR1= P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP),
breast cancer resistance pump (BCRP).
84
--- SLIDE 85 ---
Summary:
Nonselective Chemotherapy:
Classifications and Mechanisms of Cytotoxicity
85
--- SLIDE 86 ---
Here is a framework of the main ideas about the pharmacotherapy
of cancer.
Cancer genetics
and biology
Drugs targeting
Hormonal
Chemotherapy specific cancer
therapy
pathways
Combination
therapies
Surgery Radiation Drugs
Neoadjuvant Adjuvant
therapy therapy
86
--- SLIDE 87 ---
SITES OF ACTION
87
Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 13e, 2018; Figure 65-2
--- SLIDE 88 ---
Mechanisms of Cancer Resistance
88
Cmap by Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
--- SLIDE 89 ---
Class / Drugs Mechanism
Alkylating/ Adducting Agents:
Cell cycle nonspecific (occurs at any stage).
Cells are most vulnerable in G1 and S phases
Alkylating agents Transfer alkyl groups N7 position of guanine (mainly) and other points
Cyclophosphamide on DNA. Also react with other cellular nucleophiles.
Ifosfamide Alkylation of DNA results inter- and intrastrand cross-linking, abnormal
Many others base pairing (miscoding), scission of DNA backbone, and strand
breakage.
Platinum analogs Binds guanine in DNA, forming adducts with inter- and intrastrand
Cisplatin cross-linking, which inhibits polymerases, thus inhibiting DNA
Carboplatin replication/synthesis and RNA synthesis.
Oxaliplatin
89
--- SLIDE 90 ---
Class / Drugs Mechanism
Antimetabolites: S phase cell cycle specific activity
Antifolates: Inhibit DHFR and thymidylate synthase, which inhibits de novo purine
Methotrexate nucleotide synthesis
Two others
Fluoropyrimidines: 1- 5-FU is converted to 5-FdUMP. Forms stable complex:
5-Fluorouracil 5-FdUMP-folate-thymidylate synthase that inhibits thymidylate synthesis
Capecitabine 2- Incorporation of FdUTP into DNA leads to strand breaks and faulty DNA
One more replication
3- Incorporation of FUTP in RNA disrupts RNA production and function
Deoxycytidine analogs: Cyt: Converted to active Ara-CTP that inhibits DNA polymerase , which
Cytarabine blocks DNA synthesis, and polymerase , which blocks DNA repair;
Gemcitabine AraCTP incorporation into DNA and RNA inhibits their synthesis.
Gem: similar, plus inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase
Purine antagonists Converted to toxic purine nucleotides that are incorporated into DNA and
6-Mercaptopurine RNA inhibiting their synthesis
6-Thioguanine
Two others
90
--- SLIDE 91 ---
Antitumor Antibiotics: Cell cycle nonspecific
Antitumor Antibiotics: 1- Topoisomerase II inhibition and irreversible DNA strand scission
Doxorubicin 2- Intercalation by high-affinity binding to DNA, blocking DNA and RNA
Four other synthesis
anthracyclines, 3- Generation of semiquinone free radicals that cause damage to DNA,
Two other antibiotics proteins, and cell membranes
Microtubule Inhibitors: M phase cell cycle specific in metaphase
Vinca alkaloids: Bind -tubulin → blocks tubulin polymerization into microtubules →
Vinblastine disrupts formation of mitotic spindle → chromosomal segregation and cell
Vincristine proliferation are inhibited
Vinorelbine
Taxanes: Bind with high-affinity to microtubules → stabilizes existing microtubules →
Paclitaxel prevents mitotic spindle function and cell division → cell cycle arrest →
Docetaxel apoptosis
Two others
Topoisomerase Inhibitors: S phase cell cycle specific
Camptothecins: Inhibit topoisomerase I, the enzyme that cuts and religates single DNA
Irinotecan strands
Topotecan
Epipodophyllotoxins: Inhibits topoisomerase II, the enzyme that cuts and re-ligates
Etoposide double stranded DNA
91
--- SLIDE 92 ---
From: 35 Anticancer Drugs
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 7e, 2019
Legend:
Chemo Man—a summary of toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents.
Copyright © Wolters Kluwer
92
Date of download: 4/10/2021
--- SLIDE 93 ---
Check your knowledge
What class of drugs induces cell death by nucleophilic attack on DNA bases, esp. the N7
guanine, leading to inter- and intrastrand cross-linking, abnormal base pairing, miscoding,
and strand breakage.
• The alkylating agents. DNA damage activates of DNA repair systems that create DNA
strand breaks by repair enzymes, which activates the apopotosis pathway.
What cellular mechanisms are essential for cell death?
• Recognition of the adduct
• Intact mismatch repair and DNA damage repair systems to induce DNA strand breaks
by repair enzymes
• Normal p53 gene and activation of checkpoint proteins
• Resistance develops rapidly when a drug is used as a single agent
What is the active cytotoxic metabolite of cyclophosphamide (and ifosfamide)?
• Phosphoramide mustard: cyclophosphamide→ hydroxycyclophosphamide→
aldophosphamide → phosphoramide mustard
93
--- SLIDE 94 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the name of the urotoxic metabolite and how can the toxicity be mitigated?
• Acrolein toxicity to bladder epithelium causes hemorrhagic cystitis.
• Mesna conjugates and inactivates acrolein, decreasing the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis
What is a mechanisms of tumor resistance to cyclophosphamide and ifosphamide?
• Increased expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase increases the rate of metabolism of
aldophosphamide to inactive carboxyphosphamide.
• Increased expression glutathione transferase detoxifies alkylating intermediates
Cyclophosphamide is used in the treatment of what categories of cancers?
• Numerous solid and blood tumors and immunosuppression in autoimmune diseases.
List the common and serious toxicities of cyclophosphamide.
• bone marrow suppression, liver tox., cardiotox, lung tox, malignancies and class tox.
94
--- SLIDE 95 ---
Check your knowledge
How does the mechanism of the platinum analogs compare with the mechanism of the
alkylating agents?
• Alkylating agents: Nucleophilic attack on DNA→ cross-linking→ activate DNA repair
mechanisms→ apoptosis
• Platinum analogs: Diffuse through copper transporter→ aquation to positively charged
molecules→ nucleophilic attack on DNA → cross-linking→ activate DNA repair
mechanisms→ apoptosis. Platinum analogs also bind nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins
• Apoptosis requires that p53 and other checkpoint proteins are intact.
What are the main mechanisms of resistance to platinum analogs?
• Efflux (ATP7A/B copper exporters)
• Inactivation (metalloproteinases, glutathione-S-transferase, sulfhydryls)
• Loss of DNA mismatch repair and decreased apoptosis, and other mechanisms.
95
--- SLIDE 96 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the definition of dose-limiting toxicities?
• Specific adverse effects of a drug that are severe enough to prevent an increase in the dose.
They are critical in determining the maximum tolerated dose during clinical trials, especially in
oncology.
What are the dose-limiting toxicities of cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin?
• Cisplatin: nephrotoxicity; carboplatin: bone marrow suppression; oxaliplatin: peripheral
neuropathy, acute and delayed (progressive)
In sequential administration of a platinum analog with paclitaxel or docetaxel, why is the taxane
administered first?
• To limit myelosuppression (taxane) and increase efficacy.
• Pharmacokinetic data during clinical trials with paclitaxel administered in sequential infusion
with cisplatin demonstrated a decrease in paclitaxel clearance when paclitaxel was
administered after cisplatin.
• The mechanism has not been identified.
• Administer paclitaxel before cisplatin, when given as sequential infusions, to limit toxicity.
Problems associated with other taxane/platinum combinations are possible, although
unsubstantiated. Administering the taxane derivative before the platinum derivative seems
prudent.
96
--- SLIDE 97 ---
Check your knowledge
A broad spectrum chemotherapy causes irreversible cardiotoxicity that can lead to left
ventricular dysfunction, cardiomyopathy, and heart failure, apparently resulting from
generation of free radicals and lipid peroxidation. What is the mechanism of action of this
drug?
• 1) DNA intercalation, 2) inhibition of topoisomerase II which inhibits DNA and RNA
synthesis, DNA repair, and results in DNA fragmentation, 3) generation of free radicals,
which damage DNA, membrane functions.
What are the other dose-limiting toxicities of this drug?
• Bone marrow suppression, mucositis/stomatitis
A patient with a history of rhabdosarcoma treated with a chemotherapy regimen that
includes vincristine continues to suffer with painful pins and needles sensation, motor
weakness and muscle cramps in his upper and lower extremities. What is the adverse
effect?
• Sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, which is a dose-limiting toxicity of vincristine.
97
--- SLIDE 98 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the difference between the mechanisms of action of the vinca alkaloids and the
taxanes?
• Vinca alkaloids inhibit polymerization in microtubules
• Taxanes stabilize microtubules and prevent depolymerization
• Both suppress spindle microtubule function → cell cycle arrest → apoptosis
A patient diagnosed with breast cancer receives paclitaxel intravenous infusion once
weekly every three weeks as a component of her adjuvant chemotherapy regimen that
includes doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide.
What are the dose-limiting toxicities of each drug in the regimen?
• Paclitaxel: bone marrow suppression and peripheral neuropathy (sensorimotor, glove-
stocking)
• Doxorubicin: cardiotoxicity/cardiomyopathy (cumulative dose); bone marrow
suppression
• Cyclophosphamide: bone marrow suppression and hemorrhagic cystitis (due to
acrolein metabolites), congestive heart failure 98
--- SLIDE 99 ---
Check your knowledge
A patient with KRAS mutated metastatic colorectal cancer is given the FOLFIRI regimen. What
does “IRI” represent and what is its dose-limiting side effect?
• IRI = irinotecan, a prodrug converted to toxic SN-38, a topoisomerase I inhibitor prevents
resealing of DNA strand, leading to strand breaks and cell cycle arrest in the S phase.
• DNA strand breaks causes cell cycle arrest in S phase.
What are other dose-limiting toxicities of this drug?
• Bone marrow suppression, mucositis/stomatitis
A28-year-old male diagnosed with testicular cancer is treated with the first-line regimen, BEP
regimen. E represents a drug that prevents resealing of the double strand breaks in DNA
ultimately leading to cell cycle arrest in S-G2 phase. What is the name of the drug?
• Etoposide inhibits of topo II by forming drug-DNA-topoisomerase II complex, which prevents
resealing of double-strand breaks, causing irreversible double-strand breaks.
• Accumulation of DNA double strand breaks causes cell cycle arrest in late S and G2 phases
and apoptosis.
99
--- SLIDE 100 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the mechanisms of action of the other two drugs in the BEP regimen?
(I don’t expect you to know the answer so I will tell you because it is Boards Relevant.)
• B=Bleomycin, an antitumor antibiotic that forms a complex with DNA and iron: DNA-B-Fe2+,
which is oxidized to DNA-B-Fe3+. Superoxide and hydroxyl radicals are formed, which attack
phosphodiesterase bonds of DNA, resulting in strand breaks and chromosomal aberrations.
Bleomycin causes pulmonary fibrosis (“bleomycin lung”).
• P=platinum=cisplatin. Chlorine molecules on the structure are replace by water molecules
(aquation) in the low-chloride environment inside the tumor cell, which then attacks purine
residues on DNA, especially the N7 of guanine, leading to inter- and intrastrand breaks and
miscoding – apoptosis (if recognized by p53 and other checkpoint proteins). Nephrotoxicity is
the dose-limiting toxicity.
What is an important mechanism of resistance common to the anthracyclines and the antitumor
natural products?
• Efflux via upregulated expression of efflux pumps: multidrug resistance (MDR) pumps including
MDR1= P-glycoprotein, multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP), breast cancer
10
resistance pump (BCRP).
0
--- SLIDE 101 ---
https://www.physio-pedia.com/Chemotherapy_Side_Effects_and_Syndromes
10
https://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/intravenous-chemotherapy 1
--- SLIDE 102 ---
References
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024: Chapter 54: Cancer
Chemotherapy
• Access Medicine Katzung's Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024;
chapter 54 Cancer Chemotherapy
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 14e,
2023; Section VIII: Pharmacotherapy of Neoplastic Disease
• UpToDate Lexidrug monographs
10
2
--- SLIDE 103 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R