SOURCE: Lecture # 157. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antineoplastic Agents Part 2
Targeted Anticancer Therapeutics
Protein Kinase Inhibitors
Pathway Targeted Small Molecules
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
CAR T Cells
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Following this session, students will be able to:
1. Compare and contrast the actions and effects of the targeted anticancer drugs
that block specific molecules in oncogenic pathways with immunotherapeutics
that trigger the immune system to identify and attack cancer cells.
2. Compare and contrast the mechanisms of resistance of the targeted drugs and
the conventional chemotherapies.
3. Relate the toxicities of the targeted agents with their mechanisms of action and
effects.
4. Apply the mechanistic and pharmacokinetic properties of the targeted agents to
their drug interactions.
5. Create a concept map or other technique integrating the mechanisms of action
and resistance, potential toxicities, drug-disease and drug-drug interactions to
the selection of drugs for combination antineoplastic therapeutic regimens.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions (questions FOR learning)
Optional materials:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Notes handout  Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Links
Scholar Rx Bricks:
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: General Pharmacology > Chemotherapy > Chemotherapy Agents
Title of Brick: Alkylating and Platinum Agents
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0016
Title of Brick: Antimetbolite Agents
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0017
Title of Brick: Topoisomerase Inhibitors, Microtubule Inhibitors, and Antitumor Antibiotics
Link: https://usmle-rx.scholarrx.com/rx-bricks/brick/CP_PHR0019
Access Medicine Katzung Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 54: Cancer Chemotherapy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/book.aspx?bookid=3382#281742356
THE REVIEW BOOKS BELOW HAVE PRACTICE QUESTIONS
LWW Health Library, Medical Education; Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews, 8e, 2023; Chapter 37: Anticancer Drugs
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329619&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 54: Cancer
Chemotherapy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=28
5600220
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Approach to cancer treatment
Cancer treatment has evolved since the recognition of cancer genetics
and the development of targeted therapeutics that specifically attack
cancer cells.
• The drivers of cancer growth are the oncogenic pathways in malignant cells, the
tumor microenvironment, and malignant cells’ escape from host immune
surveillance.
• Targeted anticancer therapeutics specifically act on well-defined extracellular or
intracellular molecules to interrupt the oncogenic signaling, tumor growth, and
proliferation.
• The targeted therapies are usually used in combination regimens including with
nonselective cytotoxic chemotherapies and/or other targeted drugs.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
7
http://migration.wordpress.com/2007/08/25/basic-concepts-signal-transduction/
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Targets of biologic and small molecule targeted agents:
Targeted agents block specific molecules in oncogenic pathways that lead to
dysregulated cancer cell growth and survival, which interferes with growth,
progression, and spread of cancer.
Small molecule drugs and Biologics
• Small molecule drugs block intracellular targets, preventing activation of
signaling pathways.
• Antibody therapeutics block soluble growth factors or specific cell surface
receptors, preventing activation of the receptor’s signaling pathway.
• Antibody-drug conjugates consist of an antibody that carries a cytotoxic payload
to tumors overexpressing specific growth factor receptors.
• Immune checkpoint inhibitors unleash the immune system against the tumors.
• CAR-T cells are genetically engineered T cells against specific tumor antigens.
The following slides summarize the cancers and drug classes in this presentation.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Cancers and their targeted drug therapies
Cancer Targeted Drug Therapies
CML, Ph+ BCR:ABL TK inhibitors: Imatinib and others
Colorectal cancer EGFR inhibitors: cetuximab, panitumumab VEGF inhibitor: bevacizumab
Breast cancer, HER2+ Trastuzumab, trastuzumab emtansine, pertuzumab, lapatinib
Breast cancer, HER2− Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors:
Palbociclib and others Olaparib and others
Lymphomas, CD20+ CD20-targeting agents: rituximab and others
Multiple myeloma IMiDs: Lenolidamide and others CD36-targeting agents: darutumumab
Proteasome inhibitors: bortezomib Glucocorticoid: dexamethasone
Various hematologic Immunotherapies
cancers and solid tumors CTLA-4 inhibitors: ipilimumab and others
PD1 inhibitors: pembrolizumab, nivolumab
PD-L1 inhibitors: atezolizumab and others
Lymphomas, CD19+ CAR-T cell therapeutics targeting CD19 or BCMA
Multiple myeloma, BCMA+ 9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Inhibitors of tyrosine kinase (TK) signal transduction
TK expressed by the Philadelphia Imatinib group are competitive inhibitors of BCR-ABL
BCR-ABL
chromosome translocation (9;22) and other receptor TKs
MAbs bind to extracellular domain and inhibit
dimerization and downstream signaling
Epidermal growth factor receptor
EGFR
Small molecule “tinibs” bind intracellular domain of TK
(structurally related TK receptors)
receptors and inhibit autophosphorylation of the
receptor, which inhibits downstream signaling
MAbs bind extracellular domain and inhibit
dimerization and HER2 signaling pathway.
Human epidermal growth factor
HER2
Small molecule tinibs bind intracellular domain of
receptor 2 (ERBB2)
HER2, inhibit autophosphorylation and ERBB2
signaling.
Biologic drugs neutralize VEGF-A, preventing
VEGF Vascular endothelial growth factor
activation of VEGF receptors (VEGFRs).
MAbs and small molecule “nibs” inhibit receptor
VDGFR VEGF receptors signaling, tumor vascular permeability, enhancing
blood flow and drug delivery
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Inhibitors of cell cycle progression and DNA damage response
Cell cycle process that is blocked Effects of the drugs
Cyclin D binding with cyclin-dependent kinases CDK4 Palbociclib and the other “ciclibs”
and 6 specifically enhances phosphorylation of the inhibit CDK4/6 which prevents
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor protein, which progression through this cell
CDK4/6
inactivates Rb, which releases Rb’s suppression of the cycle checkpoint leading to cell
inhibitors
transcription of factors that control transition cycle arrest.
specifically from the G1 phase the S phase.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) is a family of Olaparib and other PARP
proteins that synthesize PAR, which detects and inhibitors (“paribs) in tumors with
initiates immediate cellular responses to metabolic, deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations
chemical, and radiation-induced single-strand DNA or other DDR alterations prevents
PARP
breaks. tumor cells from repairing DNA,
inhibitors
PARP1 and PARP2, through multiple DNA damage making them vulnerable to
response (DDR) pathways, play critical roles in DNA apoptosis.
strand break repair that help maintain cell survival. BRCAs are tumor suppressor
genes.
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Drugs commonly used in the treatment of multiple myeloma
Proteasome inhibitors Inhibition of 26S proteasome: A large multi-catalytic ATP-dependent
Bortezomib protein complex within the proteasome that degrades ubiquinated proteins
Carfilzomib The main effect is thought to be inhibition of NF- B signaling pathway, the
Ixazomib apparent major signaling pathway of multiple myeloma.
IMiDs Immunomodulators, antiangiogenics, and antineoplastic actions by
Lenalidomide multiple mechanisms, resulting in inhibition of proinflammatory cytokine
Thalidomide secretion, T cell stimulation. These immunomodulators induce cell cycle
Pomalidomide inhibition and cell death.
CD38 inhibitors MAb directed against CD38, which is highly expressed on myeloma cells.
Daratumumab It induces ADCC, complement-dependent cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and
Isatuximab antibody-dependent phagocytosis
Dexamethasone Glucocorticoid in multiple myeloma regimens. It induces apoptosis in
multiple myeloma cells
Preferred initial standard 3-drug regimen – VRd – bortezomib, lenalidomide, dexamethasone
12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
Immune checkpoints are inhibitory signals the limit T cell activation.
CTLA-4 expressed on T cells acts as an off switch by binding CD80/86 on antigen presenting cells.
Blocking CTLA-4 prevents the inhibitory signal and boost the T cell response
CTLA-4 inhibitor
against the tumors.
Ipilimumab
Tremelimumab
PD-1, programmed death 1, is expressed on the surface of T cells, B cells, NK cells, monocytes,
and dendritic cells. PD-1 is activated by ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2.
PD-L1 is expressed on the surface of many cell types, including tumor cells.
PD-1 inhibitors
• Pembrolizumab
• Nivolumab Blocking PD-1 unleashes the immune system response against tumor cells.
• Cemiplimab
• Dostarlimab
PD-L1 inhibitors
• Atezolizumab Blocking PD-L1 on tumor cells prevents activation of PD-1, thus, boosts the
• Avelumab immune response against the tumor cells.
• Durvalumab
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T cells)
Genetically engineered T cells that express artificial T cell receptors targeting specific tumor
antigens. Both antigen-binding and T cell activating functions are combined in one receptor.
Anti-CD19 CAR-T cells Drug-specific indications:
• Tisagenlecleucel • B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
• Axicabtagene ciloleucel • Diffuse large cell lymphoma
• Brexucabtagene autoleucel • Follicular lymphoma
• Lisocabtagene maraleucel • Mantle cell lymphoma
Anti-BCMA
• Idecabtagene vicleucel • Multiple myeloma, dMMR
• Ciltacabtagene autoleucel
BCMA: B cell maturation antigen
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Hallmarks of cancer and their therapeutic implications. Drugs that interfere with each of the acquired capabilities necessary for tumor growth and
progression are in clinical trials and in some cases approved for clinical use in treating forms of human cancer. The drugs listed are illustrative examples.
(Reproduced with permission from Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation, CCell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):646-674.)
Citation: Chapter 10 Oncology, Brunicardi F, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, Dunn DL, Kao LS, Hunter JG, Matthews JB, Pollock RE. Schwartz's Principles of Surgery, 11e; 2019.
Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/ViewLarge.aspx?figid=222025662&gbosContainerID=0&gbosid=0&groupID=0&sectionId=216204693&multimediaId=undefined Accessed:
February 11, 2025
Copyright © 2025 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Inhibitors of
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Signaling
Overview
structures, mechanisms, adverse effects
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Tyrosine Kinase Signaling: NRTK and RTK
Non-receptor (soluble) tyrosine kinase (NRTK)
NRTKs are not connected to transmembrane domains.
NRTKs phosphorylate tyrosine residues on target proteins important in the regulation of a
vast array of cellular functions, such as gene expression, immune response, cell survival,
division.
Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
RTKs are cell surface receptors for many polypeptide growth factors, cytokines, and
hormones.
Ligand binding to the extracellular domain induces homo- and hetero-dimerization of the
receptors, autophosphorylation on intracellular tyrosine residues, and activation of
intracellular pathways.
Growth factors, like cytokines, are soluble messengers that bind cell surface receptors, which
initiates transmembrane and intracellular cascade of events in signal transduction.
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Tyrosine Kinase Signaling: EGFR, VEGFR and VEGF
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
EGFR belongs to the RTK family. EGFR is activated by epidermal growth factor and
transforming growth factor-.
Mutations resulting in overexpression of EGFR lead to continuous activation of downstream
signaling pathways, uncontrolled cell proliferation and survival, and tumorigenesis. EGFR
overexpression is found in numerous cancers and is associated with poor prognosis.
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs)
The three types of VEGFRs (-1, -2, -3) that regulate angiogenesis (new blood vessel
formation) and vasculogenesis (formation of the circulatory system). Vascular endothelial
growth factor-A (VEGF-A) is a member of the VEGF family and primary regulator of
angiogenesis. It stimulates proliferation, migration, and survival of endothelial cells. VEGF-A
is also important for vasculogenesis from endothelial precursor cells during embryonic
development.
Abnormal angiogenesis occurs in cancer, age-related macular degeneration, and ischemic
stroke. 18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is a transmembrane receptor that binds and stimulates
an intracellular protein tyrosine kinase.
1. Ligand binding (EGF
example) to inactive
monomeric state →
2. Active dimeric state
3. Phosphorylation (P) of
specific tyrosine residues
(Y) of the cytoplasmic
domains
4. Activation of enzymatic
catalytic activities
5. Phosphorylation of
substrate proteins (S) Figure adapted by LG
Citation: Chapter 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics, Katzung BG, Vanderah TW. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 15e; 2021, Fugre 2-7. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2988&sectionid=250594122 Accessed: June 03, 2022
Copyright © 2022 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 20 ---
http://www.sutent.com/images/angiogenisis
Angiogenesis: VEGF activates VEGFRs, which are RTKs
Tumor blood vessels have chaotic architecture and blood
flow. Tumor blood flow is variable, with areas of hypoxemia
and acidosis leading to the selection of variants that are
resistant to hypoxemia-induced apoptosis (often due to the
loss of p53 expression).
Tumor vessel walls have numerous openings, widened inter-
endothelial junctions, and discontinuous or absent basement
membrane.
This contributes to the high vascular permeability of these
vessels and, together with lack of functional intratumoral
lymphatics, causes increased interstitial pressure within the
tumor, which also interferes with the delivery of therapeutics
to the tumor. Tumor blood vessels lack perivascular cells such
as pericytes and smooth muscle cells that normally regulate
flow in response to tissue metabolic needs.
Life | Free Full-Text | Vascular and Neuronal Network
VEGF: Vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR: VEGF receptor
Formation Regulated by Growth Factors and Guidance Cues
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Mechanisms: Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (RTKIs)
Small molecules Passively diffuse into cytosol
Nomenclature: All have the suffix “tinibs” or “nibs”
Mechanism Block the intracellular ATP binding sites of the tyrosine kinase domain,
preventing autophosphorylation and activation of signaling pathways
Oral Oral route and once or twice daily dosing is convenient for the patient.
CYP3A4 substrates High potential for drug-drug interactions. Many are also substrates of P-gp.
Adverse effects Mechanism related: Inhibition of growth pathways in normal cells
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
• Rash (acneiform) / desquamation (skin peeling)
• Liver injury
• Myocardial dysfunction / heart failure
• Bone marrow dysfunction: anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia
• Susceptibility to infection
• Hypertension
• Periorbital edema
• and more
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Mechanisms: Antibody Inhibitors of Tyrosine Kinase Receptors
Proteins Monoclonal antibodies  nomenclature suffix “mabs”
Mechanism Antibodies bind the bind the extracellular domain at specific epitopes of specific
receptor types, which blocks the natural ligand from binding and prevents
receptor dimerization and activation.
(Induction of anti-drug antibodies reduces efficacy.)
Injection IV continuous infusion or subQ injection
long half-life Coformulation with hyaluronidase permits subcutaneous injection by catalyzing
degradation of hyaluronic acid, making tissues more permeable
Half-life days to weeks (drug-specific)
Metabolized mainly by proteolysis in the liver and reticuloendothelial system
Adverse effects Mechanism related: Inhibition of growth pathways in normal cells
• Class adverse effects (previous slide)
• Infusion reactions, systemic and can be severe; can occur during or shortly
after infusion; premedication with antihistamine and glucocorticoid can mitigate
this adverse effect
• Injection site reactions, local
• Hypersensitivity reactions
22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Mechanisms: Inhibitors of VEGF and VEGFR
Structures Monoclonal antibodies
Small molecule multitargeted drugs, oral
Mechanisms 1- Antibody binds soluble extracellular VEGF-A (a growth factor) preventing it
from activating its receptors
2- Antibody binds VEGFR inhibiting dimerization and activation of signaling
pathways
Small molecule multitargeted drugs block various signaling pathways, including
the angiogenesis pathways.
Adverse effects Mechanism related: Inhibition of angiogenesis
• Hypertension
• Hemorrhage
• Arterial thromboembolism
• Impaired wound healing
• Wound dehiscence (separation of previously closed wound)
• Infusion reactions
23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
BCR-ABL Kinase Inhibitors
For the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Imatinib Dasatinib Nilotinib
• •
Ponatinib Bosutinib Asciminib
• •
The second-generation inhibitors (all those developed after imatinib) are more potent
than imatinib and are effective against some resistance-conferring mutations.
Tumor cells harboring the T315I mutation is susceptible only to ponatinib and asciminib
due to different mechanisms of action.
(T315I: threonine to isoleucine point mutation)
BCR::ABL1 fusion oncogene – the Philadelphia chromosome – is a clonal cytogenetic
abnormality resulting from a translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22. It codes a
constitutively active cytoplasmic (NRTK) tyrosine kinase, BCR::ABL1, that drives unregulated
cell growth.
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Class Properties: Typical of all “tinibs”
A Oral  Protein binding >90% CYP3A4, P-glycoprotein substrate  excreted in feces
MOA Binds TK and prevents ATP from binding and activating the kinase (see next slide)
MOR Point mutations prevent tight binding of the drug and lock the enzyme in its open
configuration, allowing the substrate access to the site.
Point mutations can arise in 3 separate segments of the kinase domain (main mechanism)
T315I in ABL1 residue: Only ponatinib and asciminib are effective.
Uses Imatinib: CML, Ph+, initial chronic, accelerated or blast phase, GIST and other c-kit
pathways, PGDFR-driven cancers (see following chart)
AEs Typical of tinibs class: nausea/vomiting/diarrhea; bone marrow suppression; hepatotoxicity
• Imatinib-induced periorbital edema occurs frequently.
• Skin rashes occur relatively frequently. Mild rashes are managed with topical steroids.
Severe rashes require dose reduction or temporary discontinuation of the drug
• Drug interactions, high potential, CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein related
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Inhibition of the tyrosine kinase domain of the BCR-ABL oncoprotein
9:22 translocation
Goldman Cecil Medicine 23e Figure 194-4
Wikipedia: Aryn89
BCR::ABL1 inhibitors occupy the ATP binding pocket → prevent substrate
phosphorylation and downstream activation of signals
• Imatinib and the other BCR::ABL1 inhibitors also inhibit various tyrosine kinases, such as platelet-
derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)and c-kit (drug-specific actions).
• Ponatinib has multiple contact points → an individual mutation has less effect on overall binding.
• Asciminib is an allosteric inhibitor → holds BCR::ABL1 in an inactive conformation.
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors Therapeutic Uses
Goals, patients with chronic phase CML: To achieve clinical remission, maintain long-term
disease control, avoid disease progression to accelerated phase or blast crisis, and optimizing
the quality of life by limiting drug-related toxicities
Drug CML, Ph+ ALL, Ph+ CML, T315I Other
note correction mutation
GIST (c-Kit), other c-Kit tumors
Imatinib ✓* ✓
PDGFR-driven cancers
GIST
Dasatinib ✓* ✓
GIST
Nilotinib ✓* ✓
Bosutinib ✓*
Ponatinib ✓* ✓ ✓*
Asciminib ✓ ✓
*initial chronic, accelerated or blast phase
GIST: gastrointestinal stromal tumor; PDGFR: platelet-derived growth factor receptor
27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Open i beta: An open access biomedical search engine http://openi.nlm.nih.gov/index.php
Imatinib-induced rash and periorbital edema
28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What type of protein is expressed by the BCR::ABL1 driver mutation?
• Constitutively active cytosolic tyrosine kinase, BCR::ABL1.
• What is the importance of the T315I point mutation in the ABL1 contact residue?
• This mutation confers resistance to all but two BCR::ABL1 inhibitors.
• What drugs are active against CML harboring this mutation?
• Ponatinib and Asciminib
• What are some class toxicities of the tinibs group?
• Diarrhea, rash, edema including orbital edema, bone marrow suppression,
CYP3A4 drug interactions
• What are the serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of ponatinib?
• Arterial occlusive events → acute MI, stroke, brain arterial stenosis, PVD; heart
failure; QT interval prolongation / arrhythmia; hepatotoxicity
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Biologic Inhibitors
For the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer
Goals of therapy:
To prolong overall survival and maintain quality of life for as long as possible
EGFR Inhibitors VEGF Inhibitor
Cetuximab Bevacizumab
Panitumumab
Adjuvant therapy with chemotherapy such as FOLFOX
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
PK and Mechanisms of action:
Pharmacokinetics of MAbs: parenteral, endocytosis and proteolysis
Cetuximab and Panitumumab Bevacizumab
Competitive inhibitors of EGFR, HER1, ErB-1 Binds and neutralizes VEGF-A
 (takes VEGF-A out of action)
block dimerization which prevents 
phosphorylation and activation of prevents VEGF-A binding to
receptor-associated kinases endothelial VEGF receptors
 
Inhibits cell growth prevents receptor signaling that normally
Induces apoptosis increases vascular permeability
Decreases matrix metalloproteinase and formation of new blood vessels
Decreases VEGF
Cetuximab also induces ADCC.
Cetuximab and panitumumab are NOT effective in
tumors expressing mutations of KRAS oncogene
(occurs in 40-50% of colorectal tumors) → tumors
should be tested for KRAS mutations.
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Therapeutic Uses
Cetuximab:
• Colorectal cancer, metastatic, EGFR-
Bevacizumab:
expressing, KRAS wild-type
• Colorectal cancer, metastatic
1st-line with FOLFOX or FOLFIRI
• Cervical cancer, metastatic
• Head and neck cancer, squamous cell with
• Glioblastoma, recurrent
cisplatin-based
• Hepatocellular carcinoma, metastatic
• Penile cancer, squamous cell
• Non-small cell lung cancer, nonsquamous
• Skin cancer, squamous cell,
• Ovarian epithelial, fallopian tube, primary
Panitumumab:
peritoneal cancer
• Colorectal cancer, metastatic, EGFR-
• Renal cell carcinoma, metastatic
expressing, KRAS wild-type with FOLFOX or
FOLFIRI or other chemo
• Skin cancer, squamous cell, advanced Adverse effects are related to impairment of
angiogenesis including severe hemorrhage,
poor wound healing / wound dehiscence,
Adverse effects are typical class toxicities
hypertension, arterial occlusive events:
related to inhibition of EGFR signaling and
stroke, MI, GI perforation
certain drug-specific effects of certain
combination regimens 32
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Cetuximab and panitumumab are ineffective in tumors with what mutation?
• KRAS, oncogene for a GTPase, a transducer of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway
• What are the target and disease treated by both cetuximab and panitumumab?
• Monoclonal antibodies directed against EGFR for metastatic colorectal cancer.
• What is the mechanism of bevacizumab?
• Bevacizumab neutralizes soluble VEGF preventing it from activating its RTKs.
• What cytotoxic chemotherapies are included in the combination regimen?
• Folinic acid (leucovorin) + 5-fluorouracil + oxaliplatin + cetuximab + bevacizumab
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of these MAbs?
EGFR inhibitors: diarrhea, rash, electrolyte disturbances, lung toxicity, infusion rx
VEGF inhibitor: hemorrhage, poor wound healing, hypertension, thromboses, GI
perforation, infusion reactions
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
HER2 Inhibitors
For the treatment of HER-2-positive breast cancer
Monoclonal MAb-Cytotoxic Small Molecule
Antibodies Drug Conjugates Targeted Drugs
Trastuzumab Ado-trastuzumab emtansine Lapatinib
Pertuzumab Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan Neratinib
Margetuximab
Breast cancer is categorized as 1) those expressing estrogen receptor (ER), 2) those
expressing HER2, with or without ER expression, and 3) triple-negative – those that do
not express ER, HER2 or progesterone receptor.
The ERBB2 gene expresses HER2 RTK. HER2 oncogene is present in about 15% of
primary invasive breast cancers and is associated with lower response rates to hormonal
therapies and to most cytotoxic drugs, with the exception of anthracyclines.
34
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Trastuzumab and Pertuzumab Mechanism of Action
The pertuzumab-trastuzumab combination provides more complete inhibition of
HER2 signaling.
Trastuzumab Pertuzumab
Binds HER2 domain IV Binds HER2 domain II
 
1-Prevents ligand- 1-Inhibits ligand-
independent dependent
dimerization, heterodimerization with
other HERs
2-Induces receptor-
MAb internalization 
and degradation, and
Inhibits signaling, cell
3-Induces ADCC growth, and survival
and
2-Induces ADCC
Trastuzumab schematic structure Pohlman P, Mayer IA,
ADCC: Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
Mernaugh R. Resistance to Trastuzumab in Breast Cancer.
Clinical Cancer Research, Dec 2009, 15(24):7479-7491
Margetuximab: Engineered to have greater ADCC and
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/40686569_Resistance_
to_Trastuzumab_in_Breast_Cancer
activation of NK cells compared to trastuzumab. 35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Ado-Trastuzumab Emtansine (DM1) Antibody-Drug Conjugate
1. Inhibits HER2 signaling, and…
2. Internalization of receptor delivers
the chemotherapeutic DM1
directly inside HER2-positive
cancer cells →
3. Inhibits microtubule assembly by
binding to tubulin →
4. Results in cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis.
http://www.blogoup.com/blog/2011/2/7/antibody-drug-conjugates.html
Fam-trastuzumab-deruxtecan:
Cytotoxin is a topoisomerase I inhibitor.
36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Therapies Targeting HER2 Signaling
Resistance:
Different mechanisms
probably coexist:
Target alterations,
PI3K-AKT pathway
alterations,
HER2 overexpression
Tinoco G, Warsch S, Glück S, Avancha K, Montero AJ. Treating Breast Cancer in the 21st Century:
Emerging Biological Therapies. J Cancer 2013; 4(2):117-132. doi:10.7150/jca.4925 Image No. 01.
Accessed April 28, 2016 from http://www.jcancer.org/v04p0117.htm 37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Treatment of HER2-positive tumors
In combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy
Trastuzumab / Trastuzumab-hyaluronidase Pertuzumab
Neo-adjuvant and adjuvant therapy
Neo-adjuvant and adjuvant therapy
• Breast cancer, early and metastatic
• Breast cancer
First-line adjuvant treatment regimen:
Pertuzumab-trastuzumab-hyaluronidase
Trastuzumab, taxane, and/or doxorubicin,
• SubQ in patients who have not received
cyclophosphamide,  pertuzumab
prior anti-HER2 or chemotherapy for
• Gastric cancer
metastatic disease
• Colorectal cancer
Hyaluronidase increases permeability of subcutaneous
• Endometrial cancer
tissue.
Ado-Trastuzumab Emtansine
• Breast cancer, early and metastatic
• in patients previously treated with trastuzumab and taxane
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Trastuzumab / Pertuzumab Toxicities and Drug Interactions
Cardiac failure Decreased left ventricular ejection fraction and congestive heart failure
the most serious Highest risk with anthracycline chemotherapy regimen
toxicity
Underlying cardiac disease should be ruled out prior to starting therapy;
Clinical and subclinical
clinical follow-up thereafter.
Infusion reactions Fever, chills, nausea, dyspnea, rash; typical of monoclonal antibody
therapy
Pulmonary toxicity Pulmonary infiltrates / edema / Interstitial pneumonitis / ARDS
Various others GI problems, peripheral sensory neuropathy, joint/muscle pain,
elevated serum transaminases, and more
Pregnancy Embryo-fetal death
Drug interactions Doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide  risk of cardiac toxicity
Ado-trastuzumab Hepatotoxicity w. liver failure/death, thrombocytopenia,
sensory and motor peripheral neuropathy, CYP3A4 drug interactions
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Lapatinib: Small Molecule TKI targeting HER2
PK Oralprotein binding >99%hepatic CYP3A4fecest½ ~24 h
MOA Reversibly binds EGFR (ErB1) and HER2 (ErB2) → blocks
autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues → blocks activation of second
messengers, Erk1/2 and Akt
Resistance HER2 TK domain mutations, alternate receptors, alternate intracellular
pathways
Uses Breast cancer, advanced or metastatic (combination regimens)
• After prior anthracycline, taxane, trastuzumab therapy
• With progression on prior trastuzumab therapy
• With previously untreated brain metastases
• Salvage therapy
Colorectal cancer, metastatic, with progression on conventional chemotx
Toxicities Diarrhea, rash, cardiotoxicity LVEF, QT prolongation, hepatotoxicity,
pulmonary toxicity
Interactions CYP3A4-related
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Mechanistically, how do trastuzumab and pertuzumab work together?
• More complete inhibition of HER2 signaling by binding different epitopes in HER2.
• Mechanistically, how does lapatinib interfere with HER2 signaling?
• Lapatinib is an oral small molecule that prevents activation of intracellular receptor
tyrosine kinases, which prevents activation of second messengers.
• What is the mechanistic concept of antibody-drug conjugates?
• The antibody directed against a specific target delivers a cytotoxic payload to
those cells expressing the receptors, thereby limiting exposure of host cells.
• What cytotoxic chemotherapies are included in the combination regimen?
• A taxane and/or doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, trastuzumab,  pertuzumab
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of trastuzumab?
Heart failure (esp. w. doxorubicin), lung tox, infusion reactions,
41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase (CDK) 4/6 Inhibitors (“Cyclibs”)
For the treatment of
hormone receptor-positive,
HER-2-negative breast cancer
• Palbociclib
• Ribociclib
• Abemaciclib
Cyclin D binding with CDK4 and 6 specifically enhances phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor protein (Rb), inactivating Rb, which releases Rb’s suppression of the E2F-DP1
transcription factor that regulates transition specifically from the G1 phase the S phase. The cell
is allowed to proceed through the cell cycle and divide.
Cyclin D-CDK4/6 pathway appears to be hyperactivated in human hormone receptor-positive
breast cancers.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Ciclibs pharmacology
PK Oralprotein binding 85-95%; Pgphepatic CYP3A4fecest½ ~24 h
MOA Reversible inhibitors of CDK4 and CDK6 → prevents progression from G1
to S cell cycle phase, leading to cell cycle arrest.
Uses Breast cancer, hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, advanced or
metastatic
• Preferred initial therapy: CDK4/6 inhibitor plus aromatase inhibitor
• As effective and less toxic than chemotherapy regimen
Aromatase converts androgens to estrogens. Blocking the enzyme results in
estrogen depletion.
Toxicities Neutropenia, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia; skin reactions,
(common) pulmonary toxicity, infection, stomatitis, fatigue, diarrhea, nausea,
headache
Ribociclib: QT interval prolongation; liver function abnormalities
Interactions CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein-related
43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
PARP INHIBITORS “Paribs”
For the oral treatment of BRCA-mutated advanced cancers
Cancers, BCRA mutated Olaparib Niraparib Rucaparib Talazoparib
Toxicities:
Breast cancer, metastatic,
• Common: Nausea,
 
HER2-negative
thrombocytopenia, anemia,
Fallopian tube cancer    leukopenia, dyspnea,
Ovarian cancer diarrhea, CYP-mediated
  
Pancreatic cancer drug interactions

Peritoneal cancer, primary • Risk for
  
myelodysplastic syndrome
Prostate cancer,
 
castration-resistant and AML (0.3% of patients)
Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) is synthesized from NAD+ by PAR polymerases (PARPs) located in the cell nucleus. PAR
detects and initiates immediate cellular responses to metabolic, chemical, or radiation-induced single-strand DNA
breaks.
PARP1 and PARP2, through multiple DNA damage response (DDR) pathways, play critical roles in DNA strand break
repair that help maintain cell survival.
The use of PARP inhibitors in tumors with deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations or other DDR alterations prevents tumor
cells from repairing DNA, making them vulnerable to apoptosis.
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Anti-CD20 Agents
For the treatment of CD20-positive B cell malignancies
Rituximab
(chimeric IgG1MAb)
Ofatumumab Obinutuzumab Ocrelizumab for multiple sclerosis
90Y Ibritumomab tiuxetan
radioimmunoconjugate for the treatment of relapsed indolent lymphomas
• CD20 is a transmembrane protein expressed on 95% of B cells in peripheral blood and secondary
lymphoid organs. CD20 is absent on terminally differentiated plasma cells.
• CD20 is a useful biomarker, as it is expressed on many B cell malignancies, such as chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, diffuse large B cell lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, and follicular
lymphoma.
• B lymphocytes perpetuate the inflammatory process in autoimmune disorders. Anti-CD20
therapies are useful in the management of several of these diseases
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Rituximab binds to extracellular loop of CD20 → cellular cytotoxicity
Rituximab induces depletion of peripheral B cells.
1. Activates complement-dependent 2. Binding Fc receptors mediates cell
B-cell cytotoxicity killing through an antibody-dependent
cellular toxicity.
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Structure-of-CD20-and-epitope-targets-of-
http://www.inviatospeciale.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/rituximab.jpeg
ofatumumab-rituximab-and-obinutuzumab-GA101_fig1_281779437
Klein C, Lammens A, Schafer W, et al. Epitope interactions of monoclonal antibodies targeting 46
CD20 and their relationship to functional properties. MAbs. 2013;5(1):22-33. 15
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Rituximab
PK: I.V.; rituximab-hyaluronidase → subQ admin
ANTICANCER USES NHL, CLL, Mantle cell lymphoma, ALL–B cell precursor
Example of standard therapy of diffuse large B cell lymphoma:
R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone)
IMMUNE DISORDERS
Steroid-refractory chronic GVHD Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD)
Rheumatoid arthritis Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) in children
Refractory pemphigus vulgaris Chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
Refractory lupus nephritis and more
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Possible severe infusion reactions Tumor lysis syndrome
(first-dose) Severe skin reactions
Opportunistic infection Reactivation of latent HBV infection; PML
Practice point: All patients should be screened for HBV infection. In high-risk
populations, screen for latent infections, including tuberculosis, hepatitis C virus, and HIV.
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Rituximab targets what antigen on what types of immune cells?
• CD20 cell surface protein expressed on 95% of B cells in peripheral blood and secondary
lymphoid organs. CD20 is absent on terminally differentiated plasma cells.
• What is rituximab’s mechanism of tumor and autoimmune cell eradication?
• Rituximab induces antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and complement-dependent
cytotoxicity.
• Patients should be screened for what infections prior to beginning rituximab tx?
• All patients should be screened for HBV infection. In high-risk populations, screen for latent
infections, including tuberculosis, hepatitis C virus, and HIV.
• What is the purpose of administering rituximab in conjunction with hyaluronidase?
• Hyaluronidase increases permeability of subcutaneous tissue through temporary
depolymerization of hyaluronan (high mw polysaccharide in extracellular matrix), which
increases the dispersion and absorption rate of the drug.
• How do CDK4/6 inhibitors and PARP inhibitors cause tumor cell death?
• CDK4/6 inhibitors prevent release of Rb tumor suppressor protein, which prevents progression
from G1 to S cell cycle phase, leading to cell cycle arrest. PARP inhibitors block DNA damage
response (DDR) pathways in patients with deleterious BRCA1/2 tumors, which prevents tumor
cells from repairing DNA, making them vulnerable to apoptosis.
48
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Multiple Myeloma Pharmacology
Immunomodulatory Imide Drugs (IMiDs)
Proteasome inhibitors
CD38 inhibitors
Dexamethasone
49
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Proteasome Inhibitors, IMiDs, Anti-CD38
For the treatment of multiple myeloma
Immunomodulatory Proteasome Anti-CD38 MAb Additional
targeted agents
Imide Drugs (IMiDs) inhibitors
have been
developed for
Lenalidomide Bortezomib Darutumumab
the treatment of
(Revlimid) (Velcade)
relapsed or
refractory
Thalidomide Carfilzomib Isatuximab
multiple
myeloma.
Pomalidamide Ixazomib
Preferred induction therapy based on risk stratification:
Standard risk: VRd or DRd (d=dexamethasone)
High-risk, autologous HCT eligible: DVRd, VRd, or DRd
Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell neoplasm characterized by clonal plasma cells that produce a monoclonal
immunoglobulin. These plasma cells proliferate in bone marrow and can cause osteolytic lesions, osteopenia,
and/or pathologic fractures. Hypercalcemia, kidney impairment, anemia, and infections are additional disease-
related complications.
The goal of treatment is to alleviate symptoms, reverse cytopenias, decrease end-organ damage, achieve sustained
response, improve quality of life, and achieve sustained overall survival. The drugs presented here are most
50
frequently used.
--- SLIDE 51 ---
IMiDs Pharmacokinetics
Lenalidomide
PK Oral; 1x daily for 21d of 28-day cycle
MOA Binds cereblon, a protein crucial in tagging proteins for degradation via the ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway. IMiDs prevent release of NFB, which reduces inflammation and
promotes apoptosis in cancer cells.
TU Lenalidomide is preferred IMiD for treatment of multiple myeloma, myelodysplastic
syndrome, and CLL. It is more potent and has a broader range of therapeutic uses than the
other IMiDs.
AEs • Heme: Neutropenia, Thrombocytopenia
• Thromboembolic events: VTE, DVT, PE, acute MI, stroke
• Peripheral neuropathy, sensorimotor
• Hepatotoxicity: Abnormal LFTs, hyperbilirubinemia
• Hypersensitivity reactions:Immediate: anaphylaxis, angioedema (immediate) and
SJS/TEN/DRESS (delayed)
PREGNANCY Contraindicated: fetotoxic and teratogenic – causes phocomelia
Thalidomide and pomalidamide have similar PK properties (pomalidamide: hepatic
metabolism via CYP1A2 / 3A4), the same mechanism of action and adverse effects.
51
--- SLIDE 52 ---
Lenalidomide (LEN) Mechanism of Action
LEN binds cereblon (CRBN)

forms LEN-CRBN complex

recruits substrates to CRBN for ubiquitination
by E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase

proteasome degradation of transcription factors IKZF

death of multiple myeloma cells
Numerous IMiD-dependent CRBN substrates have been identified.
Definitions are on the next slide.
Recruitment of target substrates by lenalidomide. Lenalidomide functions as a molecular “glue” for the recruitment of proteins to the cereblon (CRBN)
receptor component of the cullin–RING (Really Interesting New Gene) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex 4 (CRL4) comprising cullin 4 (CUL4), DNA damage-
binding protein 1 (DDB1), and E3 ubiquitin–protein ligase RBX1. This recruitment results in protein ubiquitylation and degradation. Due to the structural
differences, thalidomide, and its congeners, interact with and lead to the depletion of overlapping but distinct sets of proteins that include IKZF1/3 (Ikaros
family zinc finger protein) and CK1α (casein kinase I isoform-α) (Jan et al., 2021).
Citation: Chapter 71 Protein Kinase Inhibitors and Pathway-Targeted Small Molecules, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=269309724 Accessed: March 22, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Definitions
Ubiquitin: 76 amino acid protein
Ubiquitination (ubiquitylation): Post-translational modification in which ubiquitin is attached to
a target protein. It is a tightly regulated, highly specific ATP-dependent biological process
carried out by a cascade of enzymes.
Ubiquitination tags proteins for degradation, for subcellular localization, and for kinase
activation.
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases: A large family of proteins that regulate turnover and activity of
proteins with diverse functions.
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases transfer ubiquitin from E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme to a
substrate protein. The target protein is degraded by the 26S proteasome.
Cereblon: CRBN is a substrate adaptor the E3 ligase complex. CRBN forms an E3 ubiquitin-
protein ligase complex with damaged DNA binding protein 1 (DDB1), Cullin-4A (CUL4A), and
regulator of cullins 2 (ROC1). This complex ubiquitinates a number of other proteins.
53
--- SLIDE 54 ---
IMiDs immunomodulatory, antiangiogenic and antineoplastic
actions.
A. Direct antitumor effects (ie G1 arrest or apoptosis) by
disrupting the antiapoptotic effect of BCL2 family members,
blocking NF-B signaling, and inhibiting IL-6 production.
B. Inhibit MM cell adhesion to bone marrow stromal cells
partially due to the reduction of IL-6 release.
C. Decrease angiogenesis due to inhibition of cytokine and
growth factor production and release.
D. Enhance cell-mediated cytotoxicity by increasing T cell
production of cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-γ, that
increase the number and cytotoxic functionality of NK cells.
Overview of proposed mechanisms of antimyeloma activity of thalidomide and its derivatives. Some biological hallmarks of the malignant phenotype are indicated in blue boxes. The proposed sites of
action for thalidomide (letters inside red and green circles) are hypothesized to also be operative for thalidomide derivatives. A. Direct anti-MM effect on tumor cells, including G growth arrest or
1
apoptosis, even against MM cells resistant to conventional therapy. This is due to the disruption of the antiapoptotic effect of BCL2 family members, blocking NF-κB signaling, and inhibition of the
production of IL-6. Mechanistic studies show that lenalidomide can kill MM cells by inducing E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4-CRBN–mediated ubiquitination and degradation of the crucial IKZF1 and -3 (zinc
finger transcription factors). B. Inhibition of MM cell adhesion to bone marrow stromal cells partially due to the reduction of IL-6 release. C. Decreased angiogenesis due to the inhibition of cytokine and
growth factor production and release. D. Enhanced T-cell production of cytokines, such as IL-2 and IFN-γ, that increase the number and cytotoxic functionality of NK cells.
Citation: Chapter 71 Protein Kinase Inhibitors and Pathway-Targeted Small Molecules, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=269309724 Accessed: March 22, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Thalidomide: Pregnancy Contraindicated
• Embryotoxic: Severe developmental deformities including
• Stunted limb growth (phocomelia)
• Fetal cardiac, gastrointestinal, bone, external ear, eye, and genitourinary tract
abnormalities have been described
• Mortality at or shortly after birth reported
Thalidomide, lenalidomide, and
pomalidomide are present in semen.
➢ Advise patients to use condoms
with partners who could become
pregnant during therapy and at
least 4 weeks after treatment
completion.
http://wordinfo.info/unit/3621/s:
http://www.math.lsa.umich.edu/mmss/2005
a%20sea%20calf
/embryology/sabreim/Teratogens.htm
55
Lexicomp monograph: thalidomide
--- SLIDE 56 ---
Pharmacology of Proteasome Inhibitors
Bortezomib Carfilzomib Ixazomib
PK IV, hepatic CYPs IV, peptidase Oral, CYP3A4
MOA Reversible Irreversible Reversible
Uses MM induction MM relapsed/refractory MM relapsed/refractory
MM relapsed/refractory Waldenstrom
Mantle cell lymphoma macroglobulinemia
Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
Peripheral T cell lymphoma
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia
Toxicities GI: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, ileus
Neutropenia and severe thrombocytopenia
Peripheral neuropathy, sensory (stocking-glove) or mixed sensorimotor
Heart failure, Hypotension
Pulmonary toxicity (ARDS, pneumonitis, interstitial lung disease)
• The carfilzomib regimen (KRd) is associated with more dypnea, heart failure,
hypertension, and acute kidney injury compared to the bortezomib regmen.
• The bortezomib regimen is associated with more peripheral neuropathy.
56
--- SLIDE 57 ---
Proteasome Inhibitors
26S Proteasome is a large protein
complex of proteolytic enzymes that
degrades ubiquinated (tagged)
proteins, which is essential for
homeostasis.
Proteasomes also selectively destroy
potentially harmful abnormal or
unfolded proteins, which might be
produced in increased amounts in
cancers.
Amino acids and ubiquitin are recycled.
Nuclear factor-B (NF-B) is
constitutively expressed in myeloma
cells. The proteasome is essential for
NF-B activation by releasing it from
IB in the cytosol.
NF-B is essential for many tumor cell
processes, including cell growth and
www.velcade.info/bgdisplay.jhtml?itemname=pro...
survival.
57
--- SLIDE 58 ---
Mechanism of action: Bind 20S core of 26S proteasome
Proteasome inhibitors induce apoptosis and prevent NF-B activation
drug molecule forms a complex
with the threonine hydroxyl group in the
chymotrypsin-like active site

inhibits proteolysis of ubiquinated
proteins

accumulation of abnormal protein
conformations

activation of signaling cascades induces
apoptosis
AND
proteasome inhibition prevents
degradation of IκB, which prevents
NF-B activation
58
Paramore A; Frantz S. Bortezomib. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2; Aug 2003:611-612; nature.com; Bortezomib and NF-B)
--- SLIDE 59 ---
Anti-CD38 Agent: Daratumumab
PK IgG MAb I.V.  Daratumumab-hyaluronidase SubQ  t½ 18  9 days
MOA CD38 is a cell surface glycoprotein highly expressed on myeloma cells but
there are low levels of expression on normal lymphoid and myeloid cells.
1. Complement-dependent cytotoxicity
2. Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity – ADCC (NK cells)
3. Fc-mediated crosslinking → apoptosis
Uses MM, newly diagnosed induction regimen
• High-risk, candidates for autologous hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT):
• DVRd, VRd, or DRd followed by stem cell collection and early HCT
MM, relapsed/refractory
Systemic light chain amyloidosis (monoclonal plasma cell proliferative disorder)
Toxicity Bone marrow toxicity  Infusion reactions  latent infection reactivation
Screen for HBV infection  Herpes zoster prophylaxis
Isatuximab is an anti-CD38 MAb for relapsed / refractory MM
59
--- SLIDE 60 ---
Glucocorticoid: Dexamethasone
• Dexamethasone is a component of 3-drug, 4-drug, and 2-drug regimens for
initial treatment of multiple myeloma and relapsed and refractory multiple
myeloma.
• Dexamethasone decreases inflammation by suppression of neutrophil
migration, decreased production of inflammatory mediators, and reversal of
increased capillary permeability; suppresses normal immune response.
• Dexamethasone induces apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells.
60
--- SLIDE 61 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What is the initial therapy for standard-risk multiple myeloma?
• VRd: Bortezomib, lenalidomide, dexamethasone
• What drug is added for initial therapy in high-risk patients who are candidates for
HCT ?
• Daratumumab, CD38 inhibitor
• What is the mechanism of action of each of the drugs in the regimen?
• Proteasome inhibitor prevents proteolysis of ubiquitinated proteins and release of
NF-B. IMiDs recruit substrates, resulting in ubiquitination and degradation of
transcription factors. Dexamethasone induces apoptosis of MM cells.
Daratumumab induces ADCC, complement-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and
apoptosis.
• What drugs are known to be embryotoxic and present in semen?
• Immunomodulatory imide drugs IMiDs. 61
--- SLIDE 62 ---
Cancer Immunotherapy
IMMUNE CHECKPOINT INHIBITORS
CTLA-4 Inhibitors PD-1 Inhibitors PD-L1 Inhibitors
Ipilimumab Nivolumab Atezolizumab
Tremelimumab Pembrolizumab Avelumab
Cemiplimab Durvalumab
Dostarlimab
T cell activation is tightly controlled by co-inhibitory molecules, immunosuppressive
cells, and cytokines.
Immune checkpoints are inhibitory signals the limit T cell activation.
Malignancy can lead to immune tolerance of tumor and progression of malignancy.
Therapeutic approach:
Blocking immune checkpoints on cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells allows them to recognize
cancer cells expressing antigens recognized by the T cells and eliminate them.
62
--- SLIDE 63 ---
Antigens shed from dead cancer cells are captured and
processed by antigen presenting cells (APCs). APCs travel to the
regional lymph nodes and present the antigen bound to MHC to
stimulate T cell receptors (TCRs).
Activation Signal 1: Engagement of T cells with antigen
expressed on MHC of APCs
Activation Signal 2: Engagement of CD 28 co-stimulatory
molecule on T cells with CD80/86 (B7.1/B7.2) on APC → T cell
activation → T cell proliferation, migration, and production of
cytokines.
Checkpoint 1: Expression of CTLA-4 co-
inhibitory molecule on T cells → interrupts T
cell activation by outcompeting CD28 for
binding to CD80/86
Checkpoint 2: Expression of PD1, which
binds PD-L1 → The PD-1:PD-L1 interaction
directly inhibits tumor cell apoptosis,
promotes peripheral T cell exhaustion, and
increase in regulatory T cells (Tregs).
Graphic 90346 version 4.0
--- SLIDE 64 ---
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
CTLA-4 Inhibitors:
Ipilimumab: Blocks CTLA-4 → allows for enhanced T-cell activation and proliferation
Uses: Melanoma, colorectal cancer, non-small lung cancer, and others in combination
with chemotherapy or nivolumab
PD-1 Inhibitors:
(PD-1 is expressed on many cell types: T and B cells, NK cells, monocytes, dendritic cells.)
Block PD-1:PD-L1 interaction → release immune suppression → immune response
against the tumor
Uses: Many metastatic solid tumors as monotherapy or in combination with cytotoxic
chemo or other ICIs.
PD-LI inhibitors:
(PD-L1 is expressed on tumor cells, NK cells, monocytes, dendritic cells.)
Block PD-L1 block → prevents the PD-ligand-mediated T cell suppression
Uses: Many metastatic unresectable solid tumors as monotherapy or in combination
with cytotoxic chemotherapy or other ICIs.
64
--- SLIDE 65 ---
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: Immune-related adverse events
Adverse effects are typically transient, but they can be severe or fatal due to T cell activation
and proliferation.
Immune-related adverse events are more common with CTLA-4 inhibitors than with PD-1 or
PD-L1 inhibitors.
• Inflammatory skin reactions, immunobullous disease, vasculitis, neutraphilic dermatosis: the
most common adverse effects
• GI: diarrhea, colitis
• Hepatotoxicity: frequent, hepatocellular injury with asymptomatic elevations of ALT and AST;
severe hepatotoxicity is rare
• Endocrinopathies: Inflammation of the pituitary (hypophysitis), thyroid, or adrenal glands
due to checkpoint blockade typically results in gland failure.
• Pneumonitis: uncommon but can be severe and fatal
• Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
• Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (overactive lymphocytes and histiocytes)
➢ Practice point: Early recognition, timely intervention, including cessation of therapy, are
critical. Treatment is based on the severity of the observed toxicity.
65
--- SLIDE 66 ---
CAR-T Cell Therapies (“living drugs”)
Ex vivo modification of autologous T cells are genetically engineered to direct
the patient’s own T cells against their own tumor cells.
The cells persist as memory CAR-T cells, providing ongoing antitumor actions.
CD19 targeting BCMA targeting MAGE-A4 targeting
Tisagenlecleucel Idecabtagene vicleucel Afamitresgene
Axicabtagene ciloleucel Ciltacabtagene autoleucel
Brexucabtagene autoleucel
autoleucel
Lisocabtagene miraleucel
• T cells are harvested from the patient’s blood. The T cells are genetically engineered to
express artificial T cell receptors targeting specific tumor antigens. The engineered T
cells are returned to the patient’s body.
• Both antigen-binding and T cell activating functions are combined in one receptor.
A murine CD19-binding antibody fragment that recognizes CD19 is fused to intracellular
signaling domains from 4-1BB (CD137) and CD3-zeta.
• Anti-BCMA and anti-MAGE-A4 CAR-T cells are engineered in a similar way.
66
Idacabtagen vicleucel https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Chimeric-antigen-receptor-structure-of-idecabtagene-vicleucel_fig1_351999384
--- SLIDE 67 ---
CAR-T Cell Therapies
Drugs Drug-specific indications Toxicities
Anti-CD19 • B cell acute Cytokine release syndrome
drugs lymphoblastic leukemia • Acute systemic inflammatory syndrome
• Diffuse large cell characterized by fever and multiple organ
lymphoma dysfunction
• Follicular lymphoma • Onset: 1 to 22 days (clinical trials)
• Mantle cell lymphoma • Monitor for at least 4 weeks after treatment
• Hospitalize at the first sign: supportive care,
Anti-BCMA • Multiple myeloma
tocilizumab and/or GC
Drugs
Immune effector cell neurotoxicity syndrome
BCMA: B cell
• Neuropsychiatric syndrome that occurs in patients
maturation
treated with CAR-T therapy
antigen
• ICANS of any severity in 20-70% of patients
Anti-MAGE-A4 • Synovial sarcoma, • Onset: days to weeks after admin of CAR T cell tx
unresectable or Encephalopathy with confusion, behavioral changes
metastatic, relapsed or Visual and auditory hallucinations, language
refractory dysfunction, headache, tremors, seizures, cerebral
edema, coma, death
And many other adverse effects affecting all organ systems 67
--- SLIDE 68 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What is the mechanistic concept of the immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)?
• Immune checkpoints are inhibitory signals the limit T cell activation. Blocking immune
checkpoints on cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells allows them to recognize cancer cells expressing
antigens recognized by the T cells and eliminate them.
• What types of cancers are the ICIs used for?
• Many types of solid tumors.
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of the ICIs?
• Immune-related adverse reactions and infusion reactions.
• What is the mechanistic concept of the CAR-T cell drugs?
• CAR-T cells are genetically engineered to express artificial T cell receptors targeting specific
tumor antigens. Both the antigen-binding and T cell activating functions are combined in one
receptor.
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of CAR T cells?
• Cytokine release syndrome and immune effector cell neurotoxicity syndrome
68
--- SLIDE 69 ---
Summary
69
--- SLIDE 70 ---
Targeting oncogenic pathways that contribute to cancer growth and
metastatic spread as well as immune evasion
• Inhibiting growth factors receptors
• Altered growth factor receptor
in cancer cells
signaling
• Inhibiting tumor angiogenesis
• Activation of intracellular kinases
• Activating immune cells
• Cancer cell-host interactions and
aberrant angiogenesis • Targeting cancer cell surface
molecules to engage immune cells
• Defects in DNA repair
• Cytotoxin conjugates with
• Altered protein degradation
antibodies or cytokines
• Altered epigenetic regulation
• Cellular therapy and vaccines
• Targets that control cancer cell
behavior
70
--- SLIDE 71 ---
• Targeted anticancer agents have been developed for a wide array of cancers. They
are generally used in combination regimens with cytotoxic chemotherapy or other
targeted agents.
• Monoclonal antibodies bind to and inhibit specific receptors / cell surface proteins,
which prevents dimerization and activation of the oncogenic pathway. Some MAbs
induce antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and complement-mediated cellular
toxicity. Toxicities are related to inhibition of specific targets, such as receptor tyrosine
kinases and vascular endothelial growth factor, infusion hypersensitivity reactions.
• Small molecular oral agents act at intracellular sites, such as protein kinases,
preventing cellular functions such as gene expression, immune response, cell
survival and division. Toxicities, such as dermatologic reactions and bone marrow
suppression, are related to the inhibition of specific targets. The drugs are
metabolized by hepatic CYPs, especially CYP3A4, and have a high potential for drug
interactions.
71
--- SLIDE 72 ---
• Immune checkpoint inhibitors are drugs that prevent the checkpoint proteins from
downregulating T cell actions, thereby unleashing the T cell response against the
tumor cells. Targets are CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1. Toxicities include autoimmune
reactions due to T cell activation and proliferation and infusion hypersensitivity
reactions.
• CAR-T cells – chimeric antigen receptor T cells – are genetically engineered to
express artificial T cell receptors targeting specific tumor antigens. Both the antigen-
binding and T cell activating functions are combined in one receptor. CAR-T cells are
used in the treatment of CD19-positive leukemias / lymphomas and BCMA-positive
multiple myeloma. Potentially life-threatening toxicities include severe cytokine
release syndrome, an inflammatory syndrome with fever and multiorgan failure, and
immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS), which is a
neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized by encephalopathy, hallucinations, and
language dysfunction.
72
--- SLIDE 73 ---
Summary of TKIs
• Many protein kinase inhibitors and pathway-
targeted molecules have been developed for a wide
variety of cancers expressing these oncogenic
proteins.
• Two separate classes of drugs that target the EGFR
pathway are important in the therapy of solid
tumors: protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and
inhibitors of extracellular ligand binding.
• Monoclonal antibodies that recognize the
extracellular domain of the EGFR, inhibit ligand-
induced signaling. EGFR TKIs bind to the
intracellular kinase domain and inhibit the
enzymatic function of EGFR.
• The mechanisms and pharmacology are typical of
the drugs described in this video for CML, colorectal
cancer, and HER2-positive breast cancer.
Goodman and Gilman Figure 71-1
73
Targeting EGFR in cancer.
--- SLIDE 74 ---
From: 37 Anticancer Drugs
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e, 2023
Legend:
Mechanism of action of immune checkpoint inhibitors.
Copyright © Wolters Kluwer
--- SLIDE 75 ---
From: 37 Anticancer Drugs
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e, 2023
Gene and cell therapies for cancer.
Copyright © Wolters Kluwer
--- SLIDE 76 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What type of protein is expressed by the BCR::ABL1 driver mutation?
Constitutively active cytosolic tyrosine kinase, BCR::ABL1.
• What is the importance of the T315I point mutation in the ABL1 contact residue?
This mutation confers resistance to all but two BCR::ABL1 inhibitors.
• What drugs are active against CML harboring this mutation?
Ponatinib and Asciminib
• What are some class toxicities of the tinibs group?
Diarrhea, rash, edema including orbital edema, bone marrow suppression, CYP3A4
drug interactions
• What are the serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of ponatinib?
Arterial occlusive events → acute MI, stroke, brain arterial stenosis, PVD; heart
failure; QT interval prolongation / arrhythmia; hepatotoxicity
76
--- SLIDE 77 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Cetuximab and panitumumab are ineffective in tumors with what mutation?
KRAS, oncogene for a GTPase, a transducer of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway
• What are the target and disease treated by both cetuximab and panitumumab?
Monoclonal antibodies directed against EGFR for metastatic colorectal cancer.
• What is the mechanism of bevacizumab?
Bevacizumab neutralizes soluble VEGF preventing it from activating its RTKs.
• What cytotoxic chemotherapies are included in the combination regimen?
Folinic acid (leucovorin) + 5-fluorouracil + oxaliplatin + cetuximab + bevacizumab
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of these MAbs?
EGFR inhibitors: diarrhea, rash, electrolyte disturbances, lung toxicity, infusion rx
VEGF inhibitor: hemorrhage, poor wound healing, hypertension, thromboses, GI
perforation, infusion reactions
77
--- SLIDE 78 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Mechanistically, how do trastuzumab and pertuzumab work together?
More complete inhibition of HER2 signaling by binding different epitopes in HER2.
• Mechanistically, how does lapatinib interfere with HER2 signaling?
Lapatinib is an oral small molecule that prevents activation of intracellular receptor
tyrosine kinases, which prevents activation of second messengers.
• What is the mechanistic concept of antibody-drug conjugates?
The antibody directed against a specific target delivers a cytotoxic payload to those
cells expressing the receptors, thereby limiting exposure of host cells.
• What cytotoxic chemotherapies are included in the combination regimen?
A taxane and/or doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, trastuzumab,  pertuzumab
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of trastuzumab?
Heart failure (esp. w. doxorubicin), lung tox, infusion reactions,
78
--- SLIDE 79 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• Rituximab targets what antigen on what types of immune cells?
CD20 cell surface protein expressed on 95% of B cells in peripheral blood and secondary lymphoid
organs. CD20 is absent on terminally differentiated plasma cells.
• What is rituximab’s mechanism of tumor and autoimmune cell eradication?
Rituximab induces antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and complement-dependent cytotoxicity.
• Patients should be screened for what infections prior to beginning rituximab tx?
All patients should be screened for HBV infection. In high-risk populations, screen for latent
infections, including tuberculosis, hepatitis C virus, and HIV.
• What is the purpose of administering rituximab in conjunction with hyaluronidase?
Hyaluronidase increases permeability of subcutaneous tissue through temporary depolymerization
of hyaluronan (high mw polysaccharide in extracellular matrix), which increases the dispersion and
absorption rate of the drug.
• How do CDK4/6 inhibitors and PARP inhibitors cause tumor cell death?
CDK4/6 inhibitors prevent release of Rb tumor suppressor protein, which prevents progression from
G1 to S cell cycle phase, leading to cell cycle arrest. PARP inhibitors block DNA damage response
(DDR) pathways in patients with deleterious BRCA1/2 tumors, which prevents tumor cells from
repairing DNA, making them vulnerable to apoptosis.
79
--- SLIDE 80 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What is the initial therapy for standard-risk multiple myeloma?
VRd: Bortezomib, lenalidomide, dexamethasone
• What drug is added for initial therapy in high-risk patients who are candidates for
HCT ?
Daratumumab, CD38 inhibitor
• What is the mechanism of action of each of the drugs in the regimen?
Proteasome inhibitor prevents proteolysis of ubiquitinated proteins and release of
NF-B. IMiDs recruit substrates, resulting in ubiquitination and degradation of
transcription factors. Dexamethasone induces apoptosis of MM cells. Daratumumab
induces ADCC, complement-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and apoptosis.
• What drugs are known to be embryotoxic and present in semen?
Immunomodulatory imide drugs IMiDs.
80
--- SLIDE 81 ---
Check your knowledge:
You might want to pause the video to think about the answers.
• What is the mechanistic concept of the immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)?
Immune checkpoints are inhibitory signals the limit T cell activation. Blocking immune checkpoints
on cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells allows them to recognize cancer cells expressing antigens recognized
by the T cells and eliminate them.
• What types of cancers are the ICIs used for?
Many types of solid tumors.
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of the ICIs?
Immune-related adverse reactions and infusion reactions.
• What is the mechanistic concept of the CAR-T cell drugs?
CAR-T cells are genetically engineered to express artificial T cell receptors targeting specific tumor
antigens. Both the antigen-binding and T cell activating functions are combined in one receptor.
• What are some serious and potentially life-threatening toxicities of CAR T cells?
Cytokine release syndrome and immune effector cell neurotoxicity syndrome
81
--- SLIDE 82 ---
All photographs by Aleya Cydney Photography from a Brushes With Cancer event in Chicago.
82
https://www.phillymag.com/be-well-philly/2019/09/05/cancer-art/
--- SLIDE 83 ---
References
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e, 2023; Chapter 71: Protein Kinase Inhibitors and Pathway
Targeted Small Molecules and Chapter 72 Antibodies, CAR T Cells, and
Proteins to Treat Cancer
• UpToDate Lexidrug monographs
• UpToDate various topics
83
--- SLIDE 84 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R