SOURCE: Lecture # 164. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of
Drugs Used in Coagulation Disorders, Part 1
Anticoagulants
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Pharmacology Division
Rockefeller Building, Room 204
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Following this session, students should be able to:
1. List the pharmacokinetic properties of each class of drugs affecting blood
coagulation and give specific examples.
2. Explain the structure-activity relationship of each of the classes and give
specific examples.
3. Relate the mechanisms of action of each class of drugs to their effects on
blood coagulation and give specific examples.
4. Explain the clinical use of each class of drugs and give specific examples.
5. Correlate the mechanisms of toxicities, drug-disease interactions and drug-
drug interactions with the contraindications for use giving specific examples.
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions  See next slide.
Highly relevant optional materials:
• Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Video Lecture Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
• Practice questions (not graded): Simple Recall and Case Vignettes
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links to resources
Scholar Rx Bricks:
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: Hematology > Hemostasis Disorders > Thrombotic Disorders
Title of Brick: Anticoagulant drugs
Link: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/anticoagulant-drugs
Access Medicine Katzung & Vanderah’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 34: Agents Used in Disorders of
Coagulation
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281752540
LWW Health Libraries, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews, Pharmacology, 8e, 2023; Chapter 13:
Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Agents
https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253326640&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology Examination and Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 34: Agents Used in
Disorders of Coagulation
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285595695
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Key concepts
Understanding platelet activation, the coagulation cascade, including amplification
of thrombin, and the fibrinolytic process, is essential for understanding the
pharmacology.
• Anticoagulants, fibrinolytics, and antiplatelet drugs act at specific points in the clotting
cascade.
• The actions determine their therapeutic effects and adverse effects.
• The Notes Handout for this lecture includes detailed explanation of the cascades of
reactions, defines the methods for monitoring activity, and the reversal agents. I also
recommend watching a video on YouTube or other site.
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Terms
aPTT Activated partial thromboplastin time is UFH Unfractionated heparin
for monitoring UFH and direct thrombin
LMWH Low molecular weigh heparin
inhibitor therapy.
HIT Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Anti-factor Chromogenic assay for monitoring the
DOAC Direct oral anticoagulant
Xa assay activity of factor Xa inhibitors
DTI Direct thrombin inhibitor
ACT Activated clotting time, a rapid point-of-
DVT Deep vein thrombosis
care test to monitor the activity of high-
dose heparin and direct thrombin
PE Pulmonary embolism
inhibitors
VTE Venous thromboembolism
PT/INR Prothrombin time is the most commonly
STEMI ST-elevation myocardial infarction
used test for measuring warfarin therapy.
PCI Percutaneous coronary intervention
International normalized ratio is a
calculation for standardizing prothrombin tPA Tissue plasminogen activator
time.
PCC Prothrombin complex concentrate
(a human plasma product)
AT Antithrombin
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Antithrombotic drugs are used to prevent or treat blood clots. They are broadly
categorized into three main types: anticoagulants, antiplatelet drugs,
and thrombolytics.
Anticoagulants Fibrinolytics Antiplatelet Drugs
Warfarin Thrombolytics Antiplatelet Drugs
Heparin, unfractionated (UFH) Alteplase Aspirin
LMWHs Reteplase Clopidogrel
Enoxaparin Tenecteplase (TNKase) Prasugrel
Dalteparin Streptokinase Ticagrelor
Fondiparinux Urokinase Dipyridamole
Direct Thrombin Inhibitors Cilostazol
Bivalirudin
DOACs
Factor Xa Inhibitors:
Rivaroxaban (Xarelto),
Apixaban (Eliquis),
Edoxaban (Savaysa)
Direct thrombin inhibitor
Dabigatran (Pradaxa)
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Anticoagulants inhibit either the action of coagulation factors or prevent
their synthesis.
• Heparin is an injectable, rapid-acting drug with an indirect anticoagulant action by
accelerating the action of antithrombin (AT) by ~1000-fold.
Heparin has no intrinsic anticoagulation activity.
o
AT is a small glycoprotein that inhibits serine proteases of the contact activation
o
pathway.
• Unfractionated heparin (UFH) is a natural product extracted from porcine intestinal
mucosa. UFH is mixture of straight-chain, anionic glycosaminoglycans with a wide
range of molecular weights.
• UFH reversibly binds with high affinity to a specific pentasaccharide sequence on AT,
causing a conformational change that opens AT’s catalytic site. Thrombin must also
bind heparin at a site near the pentasaccharide site. AT inactivates thrombin, factor Xa,
and other coagulation factors.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Anticoagulants: UFH
• Heparin prevents the progression of existing clots by preventing further clot formation.
It has many clinical applications. UFH is administered as an IV loading dose followed
by continuous infusion or subQ administration (prophylaxis use only). It binds many
plasma proteins, neutralizing its activity and causing unpredictable pharmacokinetics. It
is eliminated by the reticuloendothelial system (nonrenal elimination). UFH has a half-
life of 1-2 hours after discontinuation. UFH therapy is monitored by aPTT, anti-factor Xa
assay, and ACT.
• UFH may cause heparin induced thrombocytopenia – HIT. HIT type I is a mild reduction
in platelets during the first two days of exposure, which spontaneously returns to
normal and is not associated with thrombosis.
• HIT type II is an immune-mediated potentially life-threatening complication of heparin
therapy when IgG attached to the heparin-PF4 complex binds the Fc receptor on the
platelet surface, leading to platelet activation and a severe hypercoabulable state.
Heparin must be discontinued and anticoagulation with a non-heparin anticoagulant
initiated. HIT type II occurs usually 5 to 14 days after initiation of therapy.
9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Anticoagulants LMWH
• Low-molecular-weight forms of heparin (LMWHs), enoxaparin, dalteparin, and tinzaparin,
complex with antithrombin at the pentasaccharide site, accelerating AT’s inactivation of
factor Xa. They have low antithrombin activity. Because of their shorter molecular
sequence, they have low affinity for thrombin.
• LMWHs have several therapeutic uses including treatment and prevention of deep vein
thrombosis (DVT), acute coronary syndromes, anticoagulation bridging, and adjunct to PCI.
UFH and LMWHs are preferred anticoagulant therapy for pregnant patients.
• LMWHs are administered subcutaneously, have reliable absorption, renal excretion (dose
adjustment for renal insufficiency), and biological half-life of ~4-6 hours. Onset of action is
20-30 min with full effect in about 4 hours. Monitoring is usually not required because of
their predictable pharmacokinetics. If clinically appropriate, anti-factor Xa assay is used.
• There is a lower risk of HIT with LMWH use. Patients with HIT may have cross-sensitivity.
LMWHs should not be used in patients with HIT.
• Bleeding is the chief adverse effect of the heparins – indeed, all anticoagulants and
antiplatelet agents. Patients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy are at increased risk
of complications of neuraxial anesthesia techniques, esp. spinal epidural hematoma.
• Protamine sulfate is a specific antidote for reversal of heparin. It directly binds UFH,
neutralizing it activity. LMWHs are less easily inactivated by protamine.
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Anticoagulants: Fondaparinux
• Fondaparinux is a synthetic pentasaccharide that reversibly binds the pentasaccharide
site on AT, leading to selective inactivation of factor Xa.
• Fondaparinux therapeutic uses include treatment and prophylaxis of DVT, PE, and
prophylaxis in patients with HIT.
• It is administered subcutaneously, has reliable absorption, renal excretion (dose
adjustment for renal insufficiency), and half-life of ~17 hours (1x daily administration).
• Monitoring is not required due to its predictable pharmacokinetics. If clinically
appropriate, monitoring is by anti-factor Xa assay.
• Fondaparinux is not inactivated by protamine.
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Direct-acting Oral Anticoagulants (DOACs): Factor Xa inhibitors
• The DOAC factor Xa inhibitors, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban, bind selectively
and reversibly to factor Xa, reducing production of thrombin from prothrombin.
• They are used for the treatment and prophylaxis of DVT and PE, post-surgical
thromboprophylaxis, and non-valvular atrial fibrillation for prevention of stroke and
systemic embolism. They should not be used for anticoagulation in patients with
mechanical heart valves due to lack of evidence of safety and efficacy.
• Rivaroxaban and apixaban are metabolized by CYPs including CYP3A4. Strong CYP
inhibitors and inducers should be avoided. Edoxaban is excreted mainly unchanged
in the urine. All are substrates of P-glycoprotein. Strong P-glycoprotein inhibitors
and inducers should be avoided.
• Monitoring is generally not required. If clinically appropriate, anti-factor Xa assay is
used.
• Bleeding is the most serious adverse effect. There is no specific antidote. PCC is used
for reversal in patients with severe bleeding.
12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Direct-acting Oral Anticoagulants (DOACs): Direct thrombin inhibitor
• Dabigatran is an oral DTI included in the DOACs group. It inhibits both free and clot-
bound thrombin by binding specifically and reversibly to the catalytic site of thrombin.
• Like the other DOACs, it is used for the treatment and prophylaxis of DVT and PE,
VTE, and non-valvular atrial fibrillation, and may be used in patients with HIT. It is
contraindicated in patients with mechanical heart valves and not recommended in
those with bioprosthetic heart valves. Dabigatran demonstrated inferior efficacy and
higher risk of thromboembolic events and bleeding compared to warfarin.
• Dabigatran is available as he prodrug dabigatran etexilate, which is hydrolyzed by
plasma esterases to active dabigatran and excreted in urine. It is a P-glycoprotein
substrate and P-glycoprotein strong inducers and inhibitors should be avoided.
Therapeutic monitoring is not required.
• Idarucizumab is a dabigatran-specific reversal agent that neutralizes its anticoagulant
action.
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Parenteral Direct Thrombin Inhibitors
• Argatroban is a synthetic intravenous anticoagulant derived from -arginine that
L
reversibly binds thrombin’s catalytic site. Its effects are immediate. It is used for the
prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolism in patients with HIT, and during PCI in
patients who have or are at risk for developing HIT. Argatroban is metabolized in the
liver and has a half-life of <1 hour.
• Bivalirudin is an analog of hirudin, a naturally occurring peptide in leech salivary glands.
Bivalirudin has a bifunctional action; it specifically and reversibly binds to thrombin’s
catalytic site and exosite 1. It is used for anticoagulation in patients with HIT,
undergoing PCI, and cardiac surgery as an alternative to heparin. Bivalirudin is
metabolized by proteolysis and has a half-life of about 25 minutes (normal renal
function).
• Anticoagulation monitoring is done using aPTT or ACT.
• PCC is used for reversal of severe bleeding.
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Anticoagulants: Vitamin K Antagonists
Warfarin is the only coumarin anticoagulant available in the US.
• Factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X, which are synthesized by the liver, require
vitamin K as a cofactor in the glutamation of a number of their residues by gamma-
carboxyglutamase. The gamma-carboxyglutamyl residues bind calcium ions, which are
essential for interaction between the coagulation factors and platelet membranes.
• In the carboxylation reactions, the reduced vitamin K cofactor is converted to vitamin K
epoxide during the reaction. Vitamin K is regenerated from the epoxide by vitamin K
epoxide reductase (VKOR1C), the enzyme that is inhibited by warfarin, which reduces
the activity of these clotting factors by up to 40%. Anticoagulant effects are delayed for
72 to 96 hours – the time required to deplete the pool of circulation clotting factors.
• Therefore, bridging therapy with a rapid acting anticoagulant (UFH, LMWH, or DOAC)
may be required.
15
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Warfarin
• Warfarin has many therapeutic uses, such as prevention of thromboembolism in
patients with atrial fibrillation with or without prosthetic heart valves, treatment and
prophylaxis of DVT and PE, and others.
• Warfarin is available as a racemic mixture taken orally with rapid complete absorption.
It is highly bound to plasma proteins. Warfarin crosses the placenta. The active S-
isomer is metabolized mainly by CYP2C9 to inactive metabolites, which are excreted in
urine and feces. Numerous drug-food and drug-drug interactions may increase or
decrease warfarin’s effect.
• Bleeding is the major adverse effect. Vitamin K administration orally or IV is used to
reverse bleeding. Replacement of coagulation factors with PCC or fresh frozen plasma
may be need for severe bleeding.
• Rare complications are skin lesions and necrosis and cholesterol emboli causing purple
(blue) toe syndrome.
• Warfarin is teratogenic and contraindicated in pregnancy.
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Brief Overview of Blood Coagulation
Recommendation: Watch a teaching video explaining the steps and
amplification of the clotting cascade. Here is a suggestion:
Khan Academy video created by Patrick van Nieuwenhuizen
https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/organ-systems/hematologic-
system/v/coagulation-cascade
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Hemostasis:
Cessation of blood loss from a damaged vessel
1. Platelet adhesion
Williams Hematology 9e Figure 112-2F
2. Platelet activation Activated platelets with filopodia (pseudopodia)
3. Platelet aggregation
4. Activation of plasma coagulation factors
5. Generation of fibrin clot, which reinforces platelet aggregate
6. Wound healing follows: Degradation of platelet aggregate and fibrin
clot
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Anticoagulants
Antiplatelet
agents
Fibrinolytics
Thrombus formation at the site of the damaged vascular wall (EC, endothelial cell) and the role of platelets and clotting factors. Platelet membrane receptors include the glycoprotein (GP) Ia
receptor, binding to collagen (C); GP Ib receptor, binding von Willebrand factor (vWF); and GP IIb/IIIa, which binds fibrinogen and other macromolecules. Antiplatelet prostacyclin (PGI ) is released from the
2
endothelium. Aggregating substances released from the degranulating platelet include adenosine diphosphate (ADP), thromboxane A (TXA ), and serotonin (5-HT). Production of factor Xa by intrinsic and
2 2
extrinsic pathways is detailed in Figure 34–2.(Labels in circles are mine – L. Goldstein)
Chapter 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation, Katzung BG, Vanderah TW. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 15e; 2021.
Citation:
Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2988&sectionid=250599717 Accessed: April 20, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Two sequences can precipitate coagulation: the extrinsic pathway – tissue factor
activation pathway – and the intrinsic pathway – surface contact activation pathway:
Tissue factor activation pathway The primary physiologic event initiating clotting
1- Endothelial damage → expression of TF
2- FVIIa + TF + Ca2+ complex (extrinsic ten-ase) activates fX and fIX → FXa and FIXa
The extrinsic pathway converges with the common pathway.
Surface contact activation pathway:
1,2- fXII contact with negative surface → FXIIa → FXIIa with HMWK cleaves XI → FXIa.
3- FXIa activates factor IX → FIXa.
❖ Thrombin amplification: A small initial amount of thrombin generated from interactions
between TF + FVIIa activates factor XI → FXIa → amplification of thrombin
generation.
4- FIXa + FVIIIa + Ca2+ complex + phospholipids (negative charge) form intrinsic ten-ase.
Ten-ase converts factor X → FXa.
5- FXa activates fVIII → FVIIIa and thrombin activate fVIII → FVIIIa
• progressively increasing fVIII activation as FXa and thrombin are formed.
The intrinsic pathway converges with the common pathway.
Common Pathway
• FXa + FVa (cofactor) + phospholipid → prothromibinase
• Prothrombinase cleaves prothrombin (factor II) → thrombin (FIIa).
• Thrombin converts fibrinogen (soluble plasma protein) → fibrin clot (insoluble)
--- SLIDE 21 ---
NATURAL ANTICOAGULANT MECHANISMS
Regulators of blood coagulation
• Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI): A plasma protein that
binds to the TF-VIIa after activation of factor X to Xa.
• Antithrombin (AT): A small plasma glycoprotein synthesized in the
liver and circulating in plasma that inactivates several enzymes of the
coagulation system, particularly thrombin and factor Xa (also factors
IXa, XIa, XIIa).
Pharmacology relevance: Heparin sulfate drugs, like endogenous
glycosaminoglycans, amplify AT action ~1000-fold.
• Thrombomodulin: A high affinity thrombin receptor on the
endothelial cell membrane that forms a complex with thrombin and
removes thrombin from circulation.
• Protein C: A vitamin K-dependent plasma zymogen requires
activation by thrombomodulin-bound thrombin.
Activated protein C is a protease that, with cofactor protein S,
This section is illustrated in the figure.
inactivates the FVa and FVIIIa. It also inhibits plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) and PAI-2, thereby facilitating fibrinolysis.
• Protein S: Vitamin K-dependent glycoprotein; Cofactor of protein C
• Nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin (PGI ): Synthesized by
2
endothelial cells and released into the blood induce vasodilation and
inhibit platelet activation and subsequent aggregation.
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Fibrinolysis
Endothelial cells secrete

tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) at sites of
injury.
tPA binds to fibrin and

converts plasminogen to
plasmin, which digests
fibrin.
Plasminogen activator

inhibitors-1 and -2
(PAI-1, PAI-2) inactivate
tPA
Antiplasmin (a -AP)

2
inactivates plasmin.
Citation: Chapter 36 Blood Coagulation and Anticoagulant, Fibrinolytic, and Antiplatelet Drugs, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Slide adapted by LG
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023, figure 36-4. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=266700467 Accessed: March 30, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Anticoagulants
Unfractionated heparin (UFH)
Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH)
Fondaparinux
Direct-acting factor Xa Inhibitors
Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs)
--- SLIDE 24 ---
unfractionated
Heparin
Sulfated anionic linear polysaccharides (heterogeneous mixture)
Molecular weight: 3,000-30,000 Da (mean ~15,000 Da)
Heparin chains of appropriate length bind heparin’s target, antithrombin.
Heparin chains also bind to endothelial cell surfaces and various plasma proteins,
neutralizing heparin’s action.
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Heparin (UFH) Pharmacokinetics:
A I.V. infusion: onset within minutes
subQ: erratic absorption (only for prophylaxis) onset 20-30 minutes
D − Nonspecific binding endothelial cells and plasma − Does not cross blood-brain barrier
proteins − Does not cross the placenta
− Polarity and large size prohibits crossing of cell − Does not enter breast milk
membranes
E Nonrenal elimination – Eliminated by the reticuloendothelial system (mainly liver and spleen)
t Mean 1.5 h (adults) after completion of infusion
1/
Half-life is affected by hepatic cirrhosis, obesity, malignancy, presence of pulmonary
2
embolism, and infections
Monitoring UFH anticoagulation: aPTT, anti-factor Xa Monitor platelet counts due to
assay, ACT potential for heparin-induced
Because of protein and tissue binding, free heparin thrombocytopenia.
levels are variable after administration
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Heparin is a catalyst that enhances the inhibitory activity of
antithrombin against serine proteases.
Heparin reversibly binds AT at its pentasaccharide sequence

causes a conformational change
that reveals AT’s reactive center loop
⎯UFH must simultaneously bind AT and thrombin
to potentiate thrombin inhibition⎯
a L
c M
 c
W
e
l
e H
accelerates AT’s protease inactivating action: r
a a
e t n
d
thrombin (FIIa) and FXa (and others) A
T F
o
n i n
~1000 times faster
a d
c a
t p
i
 v a
a r
t n i
i
o u
inactivation of the coagulation factors
n x
o
f
f
X
a
.
❖ Note: Heparin agents have no intrinsic anticoagulant activity
.
Citation: Chapter 36 Blood Coagulation and Anticoagulant, Fibrinolytic, and Antiplatelet Drugs, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023, Figure 36-5. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=266700467 Accessed: March 30, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Heparin Goal of Therapy
To reduce blood coagulability to a level that is low enough to prevent thrombosis
but not so low as to promote spontaneous bleeding
Heparin prevents progression of existing clots by inhibiting further clotting.
UFH Therapeutic Uses (many) Adverse Effects
Rapid onset of action • Bleeding – the major adverse effect of
• DVT and PE treatment and prevention anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents.
• Acute MI or unstable angina, initial mgmt. • Neuraxial anesthesia techniques → spinal or
• Cardiopulmonary bypass surgery epidural hematomas → pressure on spinal cord
• Renal dialysis or cauda equina → paralysis
• Pregnancy: UHF, LMWH, or • Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)
fondaparinux are the preferred agents − Type I: Benign, 1-2 days of therapy,
spontaneous return to normal
− Type II: Immune mediated; life-threatening
• Osteoporosis (long-term use)
Heparin resistance: Very high heparin dose is needed to achieve therapeutic aPTT or ACT
• Congenital or acquired AT deficiency
• Elevated levels of plasma proteins that bind heparin 27
• Elevated acute phase proteins, factor VIII and fibrinogen
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Pathogenesis of immune-mediated HIT.
IgG is the autoantibody against the heparin–PF4
complex.
HIT occurs if IgG attached to the heparin-PF4
complex binds the Fc receptor on the platelet
surface, leading to platelet activation.
(Platelets can bind to each other and become activated via the IgG–
Fc receptor interaction, the PF4–PF4 receptor interaction, or both.)
Activated platelets release pro-thrombotic substances
and PF4. IgG activates more platelets, more PF4 is
released forming more complexes with heparin,
activating more platelets.
A severely hypercoagulable state results.
Thrombocytopenia results from consumption of IgG-
coated platelets by cells of the reticuloendothelial
system.
Discontinue heparin.
Start a non-heparin anticoagulant: direct thrombin in inhibitor, fondaparinux, or DOAC.
Citation: Chapter 6 Blood Disorders, Hammer GD, McPhee SJ. Pathophysiology of Disease: An Introduction to Clinical Medicine, 8e; 2019, Figure 6-13. Available at:
Slide adapted by LG
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2468&sectionid=198220627 Accessed: April 03, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Heparin Antidote: Protamine sulfate
Protamine is a highly basic polypeptide derived from salmon sperm.
Duration ~2 hours
Protamine’s multiple
positively charged groups
Neutralization
The protamine-
bond ionically with
begins immediately
heparin complex is
negatively charged groups
on heparin cleared
Caution: Excess protamine has anticoagulant effect
29
Figure: www.sciencedirect.com
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Low molecular Synthetic
weight heparins (LMWH) pentasaccharide
Enoxaparin Fondaparinux
Dalteparin
Tinzaparin
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Comparing actions of UHF – LMWH - Fondaparinux
UFH-AT complex degrades LMWH-AT complex is more selective for
both thrombin, FXa, and others. FXa degradation.
Fondapirnux-AT has anti-factor FXa only.
Differences between low-molecular-weight (LMW) heparins and high-molecular-weight heparin (unfractionated heparin). Fondaparinux is a small pentasaccharide fragment of heparin. Activated
antithrombin III (AT III) degrades thrombin, factor X, and several other factors. Binding of these drugs to AT III can increase the catalytic action of AT III 1000-fold. The combination of AT III with
unfractionated heparin increases degradation of both factor Xa and thrombin. Combination with fondaparinux or LMW heparin more selectively increases degradation of Xa.
Chapter 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation, Katzung BG, Vanderah TW. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 15e; 2021
Citation: .
Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2988&sectionid=250599717 Accessed: April 20, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 32 ---
LMWH / Fondaparinux PK, Therapeutic uses, and Cautions
LMWHs Fondaparinux
SubQ; reliable absorption; renal excretion; SubQ; reliable absorption; renal excretion;
biological t½ 4-5 hours biological t½ ~17 hours
Use: Uses:
• DVT / PE treatment and prophylaxis • DVT / PE treatment and prophylaxis
• Acute coronary syndromes • HIT anticoagulation
• Warfarin bridging • Acute thrombosis unrelated to HIT in patients
• PCI adjunctive use with a history of HIT
• Cautions: as for unfractionated heparin • Acute symptomatic superficial vein
thrombosis (≥5 cm in length) of the legs
Routine anticoagulation monitoring usually not required. Anti-factor Xa-assay if clinically indicated.
Adverse Effects • Adverse effects
• Immune-mediated HIT occurs less frequently • Avoid fondaparinux alone in PCI due to
with LMWHs guided catheter thrombosis. The
• Cross-sensitivity may occur fondaparinux molecule is too short to block
• Avoid in patients with HIT the thrombotic process.
Common: Bleeding; Avoid in neuraxial anesthesia.
32
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Comparison of heparin, low molecular weight heparin, and fondaparinux
FEATURES HEPARIN, UHF LMWH FONDAPARINUX
Source Biological Biological Synthetic pentasaccharide
Mean molecular weight 15,000 Da 5,000 Da 1,500 Da
Target Xa and IIa Xa Xa
Bioavailability (subQ) 30 % 90 % 100 %
t½ 1 hour 4 hours 17 hours
Renal excretion No Yes Yes
Antidote effect Complete Partial None
(protamine)
Thrombocytopenia <5% <1% Does not cause
thrombocytopenia
Da: daltons
Adapted from Goodman & Gilman, 2023 Table 36-1
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Direct oral anticoagulants – DOACs:
Direct Factor Xa Inhibitors
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
34
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Pharmacokinetics of Direct Factor Xa Inhibitors
Rivaroxaban Apixaban Edoxaban
A Oral Oral Oral
D Protein binding >90% Protein binding ~90% Protein binding ~50%
P-glycoprotein substrate P-glycoprotein substrate P-glycoprotein substrate
M Hepatic CYP3A4/5 CYP3A4/5 predominantly Minimal metabolism
Bioavailability 66-100% Bioavailability 50% Bioavailability ~60%
dose-dependent
E Renal, ~35% unchanged Renal, ~30 % unchanged Urine unchanged
and fecal excretion and fecal excretion
t½ 5-9 hours ~8 hours (lower dose) 10-14 hours
11-13 hours in elderly ~15 hours (higher dose) once daily dosing
2x daily treatment, 2x daily dose for most
1x daily prophylaxis indications
Avoid use or adjust dose in patients with impaired renal function
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Direct-acting Factor Xa Inhibitors
Mechanism of action Direct, selective and reversible inhibition of free and clot-bound factor Xa,
independent of AT.
Therapeutic uses DVT and PE treatment and prophylaxis
Post-operative (knee, hip) thromboprophylaxis
Atrial fibrillation, nonvalvular, prevention of stroke and systemic embolus
Routine anticoagulation monitoring usually not required. Anti-factor Xa if clinically indicated.
Adverse effects Bleeding
Neuraxial anesthesia hematoma risk
Reversal Recombinant inactivated FXa: Andexanet-alfa binds and sequesters
Update: Andexanet-alfa
FXa inhibitors rivaroxaban and apixaban
was recently withdrawn
➢ Caution: Andexanet-alfa also inhibits tissue factor pathway inhibitor,
from U.S. market.
increasing tissue factor-initiated thrombin generation.
Risks of thromboembolic
events outweigh the Serious and life-threatening arterial and venous thrombotic,
benefits.
ischemic, and cardiac events have been observed 3 to 30 days
after use.
Drug interactions Other drugs that affect coagulation and platelet function
CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein inhibitors and inducers 36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Direct Thrombin Inhibitors (DTIs)
DOAC Parenteral
Dabigatran Hirudin derivatives Synthetic
Hirudin Argatroban
Lepirudin Bivalirudin
Desirudin
--- SLIDE 38 ---
DTIs act on free and clot-bound thrombin.
DTIs bind catalytic site of thrombin →
• Prevent thrombin-mediated cleavage of
fibrinogen to fibrin monomers,
and
• Prevent activation of factors V, VIII, and XIII
and Protein C
• Prevent platelet aggregation
Dabigatran and Argatroban reversibly and
specifically bind thrombin’s catalytic site.
Bivalirudin bind reversibly and specifically to the
catalytic site and exosite 1.
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Dabigatran etexilate: Oral Direct Thrombin Inhibitor
PK Etexilate oral prodrug rapidly converted to active dabigatran
Moderate protein binding; P-glycoprotein substrate
Rapid complete hydrolysis of etexilate plasma and hepatic esterases → dabigatran hepatic
glucuronidation → active acylglucuronide isomers Bioavailability 3-7%
Renal excretion of dabigatran acylglucouronides t½ ~16 hours
MOA Reversible selective inhibition of catalytic site of free and clot-bound thrombin
Uses DVT and PE prevention and treatment
Atrial fibrillation, nonvalvular for prevention of thrombotic complications
Contraindicated in patients with mechanical heart valves; not recommended in patients
with bioprothetic valves – reduced efficacy, excess incidence of major bleeds
Monitoring Routine monitoring not required. Test with aPTT if clinically indicated.
Reversal Idarucizumab binds specifically to dabigatran and glucuronide metabolites.
Cautions Bleeding Pregnancy (limited data)
Neuraxial anesthesia hematoma risk Patients 75 year – extreme caution
Other drugs affecting coagulation Obesity (BMI40 kg/m2): Use alternative drug
Pgp inducers: contraindicated
Pgp inhibitors: monitor therapy
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Pharmacology of Argatroban and Bivalirudin
Argatroban Bivalirudin
synthetic, derived from L-arginine synthetic, 20 amino acid peptide
IV, immediate onset, moderate protein binding, IV, immediate onset, binds only thrombin,
minor hepatic metabolism (CYP3A4/5), feces proteolytic cleavage, urine (20%), t½ ~25 min
unchanged and metabs., t½ 40-50 min
Uses: Uses:
Anticoagulation patients with HIT Anticoagulation patients with HIT
PCI PCI
Cardiac surgery alternative to heparin
Anticoagulation monitoring: aPTT, ACT
Bleeding, neuraxial anesthesia hematoma risk, acute stent thrombosis within 4 hours in patients
with STEMI undergoing PCI; hypersensitivity reactions reported with hirudin derivatives
Desirudin: subQ for DVT prophylaxis following hip surgery Not available for clinical use
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
VKOR1C Vitamin K Antagonists
Warfarin
Acenocoumarol available in Canada
Dicoumarol and indandione derivatives withdrawn from market
Warfarin is a racemic mixture of S- and R-warfarin: S-warfarin is
3-5x more potent inhibitor of vitamin K epoxide reductase.
coumarin
Coumarin acsv.svg
R- and S-enantiomers also differ in metabolism, elimination, and
interactions with other drugs.
Vitamin K is a cofactor of gamma-glutamylcarboxylase in the
enzymatic conversion of nonfunctional prozymogens to functional
zymogens, the coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X and
required
anticoagulant proteins C and S.
for
Vitamin K is oxidized in the process and must be converted to the activity
active reduced form by VKOR1C to continue the cycle of
coagulation factor synthesis.
41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Warfarin Pharmacokinetics
A Oral, rapid complete absorption; I.V. Onset of anticoagulation: 24-72 h
 Dose according to PT/INR results Full therapeutic effect 5-7 days
Duration of action 2-5 days
D >99% bound to albumin  Crosses placenta
M Hepatic: S-warfarin: mainly CYP2C9 R-warfarin predominantly via CYP3A4
Inactive metabolites
E Urine, metabolites t½ 20-60 hours (highly variable)
Monitoring: PT: prothrombin time and INR: international normalized ratio
High potential for drug-drug and drug-food (Vit K containing foods) interactions
Factor VII Factor IX Factor X Factor II Protein C Protein S
t½ 6 h t½ 24 h t½ 36 h t½ 50 h t½ 8 h t½ 30 h
Because of the long t of some of the coagulation factors, in particular factor II (thrombin), the full
1/2
anti-thrombotic effect of warfarin is not achieved for several days. PT may be prolonged soon
after administration due to the more rapid reduction of factors with a shorter t .
1/2
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Warfarin: VKORC1 inhibitor
Vit K-dependent factors:
II, VII, IX, X, protein C and protein S
Biochemistry: Biologically inactive prozymogens are converted
to active coagulation factors by gamma-carboxylation of N-
terminal glutamate residues catalyzed by gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase with cofactor reduced vitamin K.
Warfarin binds a VKORC1 subunit → inhibits
regeneration of reduced vitamin K from
vitamin K epoxide.
Thus, the gamma-carboxylation of
prozymogens to the functional zymogens,
factors II, VII, XI, X, protein C, and protein S,
is inhibited.
VKORC1:
vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subtype 1
Citation: Chapter 36 Blood Coagulation and Anticoagulant, Fibrinolytic, and Antiplatelet Drugs, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023, Figure 36-6. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=266700467 Accessed: March 30, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Pharmacogenomics: Variable responses
Variability in warfarin response: CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genetic variants
CYP2C9 reduced function alleles → decreased rate of metabolism → increased risk
of bleeding in patients who carry at least one copy of a reduced function allele
VKORC1 variations can significantly alter warfarin pharmacodynamics leading to
warfarin resistance or warfarin sensitivity1639A or 1173T allele → lower warfarin
dose
 When determining the initial dose, other patient related factors must also be taken
into account; for example: body weight, concomitant medications, and comorbidities.
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Warfarin Therapeutic Uses
Many anticoagulation uses:
• PT / INR measurement is most sensitive
• Thromboembolic disorders
to deficiencies in the vitamin K-dependent
such as, venous thromboembolism and
clotting factors
pulmonary embolism
• Prothrombin time (PT):
• Prosthetic heart valves
− Measures time for fibrin clot formation
• Atrial fibrillation
− Evaluates extrinsic and common
• Adjunct to reduce risk of systemic
embolism after myocardial infarction coagulation pathways
such as, recurrent MI, stroke
• International normalized ratio (INR):
• Acute venous thromboembolism
− a calculation for standardizing
Bridging with UFH, LMWH, DOAC
prothrombin time
Warfarin is not useful for rapid
− INR = [Patient PT/Normal mean PT]ISI
anticoagulation in emergency situations.
− Range for patients on warfarin: 2.0 to
3.5 (depending on indication for use)
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Warfarin: Adverse Effects
Effect Mechanism
Bleeding Extension of warfarin’s mechanism of action
• Risk of intracranial hemorrhage increases dramatically with an INR >4
• especially in older patients
Thrombosis and Low level of protein C or protein S
skin necrosis • Starting warfarin therapy in patients with acute thrombosis without
concomitant heparin or other immediately acting anticoagulant
• Inherited deficiency of protein C or protein S
Purple toe Cholesterol microembolization
syndrome • Warfarin therapy may release atheromatous plaque emboli
Warfarin resistance: Warfarin Sensitivity
Patients requiring >20 mg/day: Patients requiring <1.5 mg/day:
• Excessive vitamin K intake • Reduced function alleles
• VKORC1 variant alleles leading to warfarin • CYP2C9 or VKORC1 haplotypes
resistance • Lower maintenance dose required
Apparent “resistance” • Increase risk of bleeding
46
• Noncompliance / Laboratory error
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Management of Warfarin Overdose: Hold warfarin
• INR > therapeutic range, no evidence of bleeding: hold drug; restart when INR
within range
• INR ≥ 10, no evidence of bleeding: Vitamin K 2.5-5 mg orally; restart when INR
within range
• Serious, life-threatening bleeding: IV Vitamin K 10 mg, AND
4-PCC: Prothrombin complex concentrate
• Factors II, VII, IX, X, Protein C, Protein S
• Urgent reversal of acquired coagulation factor deficiency
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Purple toe syndrome
Skin necrosis in a patient after 4 days
(cholesterol emboli)
of warfarin therapy
Left: Access Medicine Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology, 8e; Figure 41-6
Right: Access Medicine William’s Hematology, 8e; Figure 123-9a, 9b
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Warfarin is contraindicated in pregnancy
Maternal ingestion during…
First trimester causes:
• Nasal hypoplasia
• Stippling of vertebral and femoral
epiphyses
Fetal warfarin syndrome: nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal bridge seen
Beyond the first trimester:
in (A) a fetal sonographic image and (B) in the same newborn
• Hemorrhage into fetal structures  abnormal growth/deformation
• CNS abnormalities
• Spontaneous abortion and fetal death may also occur
49
Access Medicine William’s Obstetrics, 24e, 2014; Chapter 12. Teratology, Teratogens, and Fetotoxic Agents Figure 12-5
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Warfarin CONTRAINDICATIONS for Use
• Active bleeding
• Dissecting aortic aneurysm
• Hemorrhagic tendency
• Pericarditis or pericardial effusion
• Heparin induced thrombocytopenia
• Lumbar block anesthesia
• Severe uncontrolled or malignant
• Pregnancy
hypertension
• Hypersensitivity to warfarin or any
• Bacterial endocarditis
component of the formulation
These patients are at risk of
bleeding complications
Drug Interactions High potential! Warfarin is subject to more clinically significant drug
interactions than any other drug in use today
• Anticoagulant effect may be:
– Reduced, permitting thrombosis
– Increased, causing hemorrhage
• The most serious interactions are those that increase the anticoagulant effect
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Summary
--- SLIDE 52 ---
UHF
Summary of Anticoagulants
Heparin
Indirect thrombin
LMWH
inhibitors
Fondaparinux
Argatroban
Bivalirudin
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Desirudin
Anticoagulants
Debigatran
Treatment and prevention of
Vit K epoxide reductase
Warfarin
arterial and venous thrombosis inhibitors
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Direct Xa inhibitors
Edoxaban
Betrixaban
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Summary of properties of the oral anticoagulants
FEATURES WARFARIN RIVAROXABAN DABIGATRAN
Bioavailability (%) 100% 80-100% 3-7% (etexilate)
Metabolism CYP2C9, 1A2, 3A4, 2C19 CYP3A4/5, 2J2 Hepatic glucuronidation
P-glycoprotein substrate P-glycoprotein substrate
t½ (h) 20-60h (highly variable) 5-9h 12-17h
Renal excretion Yes Yes, including unchanged Yes, largely unchanged
(mainly metabolites) Dose adjustment in renal Dose adjustment in renal
impairment impairment
Antidote effect Vitamin K Andexanet-alfa; Not dialyzable Idarucizumab; ~60% dialyzable
Therapeutic uses • DVT and PE, prophylaxis and • DVT/PE, prophylaxis/treatment • DVT / PE prophylaxis/treatment
acute treatment • Non-valvular atrial fibrillation: • Non-valvular atrial fibrillation:
• Coronary ischemia/acute MI prophylaxis of stroke and prophylaxis of stroke and
• Atrial fibrillation, patients with systemic embolism systemic embolism
chronic a-fib or prosthetic heart
valves
Drug Interactions High potential Drugs that affect platelet function Drugs that affect platelet function
or coagulation or coagulation
CYP3A4, P-glycoprotein related P-glycoprotein inhibitors
interactions
--- SLIDE 54 ---
References
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023;
Chapter 36: Blood Coagulation and Anticoagulant, Fibrinolytic, and Antiplatelet Drugs
• Access Medicine William’s Obstetrics, 24e, 2014; Chapter 12. Teratology, Teratogens, and
Fetotoxic Agents Figure 12-5
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic and Clinical Pharmacology 16e, 2024; Chapter 34: Drugs
Used in Disorders of Coagulation
• Lexidrug monographs
54
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R