SOURCE: Lecture # 165. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of
Drugs Used in Coagulation Disorders, Part 2
Fibrinolytics, Antiplatelet Agents, and Antidotes for
the Anticoagulants
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor of Pharmacology
Department of Clinical Specialties
Rockefeller Building, Room 204
lgolds01@nyit.edu
1
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Following this lecture, students should be able to:
1. List the pharmacokinetic properties of each class of drugs affecting
blood coagulation and give specific examples.
2. Explain the structure-activity relationship of each class of the
classes and give specific examples.
3. Relate the mechanisms of action of each class of drugs to their
effects on blood coagulation and give specific examples.
4. Explain the clinical use of each class of drugs and give specific
examples.
5. Describe the mechanisms of toxicities, drug-disease interactions
and drug-drug interactions, giving specific examples.
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions  See next slide.
Highly relevant optional materials:
• Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Video Lecture Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
• Practice questions (not graded): Simple Recall and Case Vignettes
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links to resources
Scholar Rx Bricks:
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: Hematology > Hemostasis Disorders > Thrombotic Disorders
Title of Brick: Anticoagulant drugs
Link: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/anticoagulant-drugs
Access Medicine Katzung & Vanderah’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 34: Agents Used in Disorders of
Coagulation
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281752540
LWW Health Libraries, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews, Pharmacology, 8e, 2023; Chapter 13:
Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Agents
https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253326640&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung & Trevor’s Pharmacology Examination and Board Review, 13e, 2021; Chapter 34: Agents Used in
Disorders of Coagulation
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-com/content.aspx?bookid=3058&sectionid=255306288
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Key Concepts: Fibrinolytics
• Fibrinolytics alteplase, tenecteplase, and reteplase are recombinant tPA (tissue
plasminogen activator) that convert fibrin-bound plasminogen to plasmin, which cleaves
fibrin, which lyses thrombi. Fibrinolytics are given early in clot formation because clots
become more resistant to fibrinolysis as they age.
• Fibrinolytics are administered IV (usually) for treatment of ischemic stroke (within 4.5
hours), acute myocardial infarction if PCI is unavailable, and treatment of PE. A
fibrinolytic may be used to restore catheter and shunt function.
• Hemorrhage is a major adverse effect. A systemic lytic state can result from plasmin
generation and degradation of other coagulation factors.
• Contraindications include pregnancy and patients with healing wounds, history of
stroke, brain tumor, head trauma, intracranial bleed, and metastatic cancer.
• Streptokinase is a protein produced by beta-hemolytic streptococci. It forms a complex
with plasminogen. The complex induces a conformational change in plasminogen that
exposes its active site. Plasminogen then converts free and clot-bound plasminogen
molecules to plasmin. Streptokinase produces a systemic lytic state. It is no longer
available in the US.
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Key concepts: Antiplatelet agents
• Platelet aggregation inhibitors decrease the formation of a platelet-rich clot or decrease
the action of chemical signals that promote platelet aggregation.
• The antiplatelet agents in this lecture block platelet COX-1 synthesis of thromboxane
(aspirin), inhibit purinergic P2Y ADP receptor (clopidogel, prasugrel, ticagrelor,
12
cangrelor), and block GP IIb/IIIa receptors (eptifibatide, tirofiban).
• Low-dose aspirin is used for primary and secondary prevention myocardial infarction
transient cerebral ischemia. It may be used with another antiplatelet agent
• P2Y receptor blockers are used for prevention of thrombotic events in patients with
12
recent MI or stroke, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), acute coronary
syndrome, and established peripheral artery disease.
• GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are intravenous adjuncts to PCI.
• As with all drugs that interfere with platelet function or coagulation, bleeding is the most
important adverse effect of this class of drugs.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Key concepts: Reversal Agents
• Protamine sulfate is a highly cationic protein that combines and forms a stable complex with
heparin and neutralizes it.
• Vitamin K (phytonadione) reverses warfarin anticoagulation by outcompeting warfarin at
VKORC1. It is administered orally or IV for severe bleeding.
• Andexanet-alfa is inactivated factor Xa for reversal of anticoagulation by the oral direct factor
Xa inhibitors (DOACs) rivaroxaban and apixaban.
• Idarucizumab binds specifically to dabigatran and its active acylglucuronide memtabolites,
reversing the anticoagulant activity.
• 4-factor PCC from human plasma consists of unactivated factors II, VII, XI and X, Protein C,
and Protein S. It is administered for urgent reversal of bleeding due to acquired coagulation
factor deficiency induced by vitamin K antagonists and DOACs.
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Fibrinolytic Agents
Alteplase
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and
Tenecteplase
derivatives
Reteplase
Streptokinase
(natural product)
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Fibrinolysis: The process of fibrin digestion by the fibrin-specific protease, plasmin.
PAI-1, PAI-2:  -antiplasmin ( -AP):
2 2
Plasminogen Complexes with and
activator inhibitors- inactivates free
1 and -2 (unbound) plasmin
In response to injury, endothelial cells synthesize and release tPA.
• tPA binds fibrin and activates fibrin-bound plasminogen several 100-fold more
rapidly than it activates plasminogen in the circulation.
• Plasmin is the active fibrinolytic enzyme that remodels the thrombus and limits its
extension by proteolytic digestion of fibrin.
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Structure-activity relationships of t-PA fibrinolytics
alteplase
• Alteplase (t-PA)
Recombinant version of natural
protein
• Tenecteplase:
tenecteplase
1. K1glycosylation site (Y)
repositioned →  t½
2. Protease domain substitution →
resistance to PAI-1 inhibition
• Reteplase:
reteplase
Nonglycosylated, truncated variant
Longer t ½ than alteplase
Binds fibrin more weakly
Harrison’s, 21e; Figure 118-9. F:finger; EGF: epidermal growth factor
K1, K2: first and second kringle domains, respectively); P: protease domain
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Pharmacology of Fibrinolytic Agents: tPA and Derivatives
PK IV, rapid hepatic clearance
Alteplase t½ <5 minTenecteplase t½ ~20 min, t½ 90-130 minReteplase t½ ~15 min
terminal
MOA Fibrinolytic agents catalyze the formation of plasmin from its precursor, plasminogen.
The drugs induce rapid dissolution of thrombi.
Both protective hemostatic thrombi and target thromboemboli are broken down, which can
cause a generalized lytic state → hemorrhage
Uses 1- Acute ischemic stroke to  neuronal death / infarction admin within 4.5 h
2- STEMI if PCI cannot be performed within 120 min, admin within 30 min of first medical
contact; may still consider in patients who present late and have ongoing ischemia, admin
within 12-24 h of symptom onset (with antiplatelet and anticoagulant)
3- PE treatment
4- Central venous catheter / dialysis catheter clearance (alteplase)
AE Hemorrhage / hemorrhagic stroke, the major toxicity, resulting from lysis of hemostatic plugs
at site of injury and from systemic plasmin generation, which degrades coagulation factors
(esp. V and VII) as well as fibrin.
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Streptokinase is a protein produced by -hemolytic streptococci.
http://media.pharmacologycorner.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/05/plasminogen-plasmin1.jpg
Mechanism of
hypersensitivity reaction
Mechanism of action
• Streptokinase forms
complex with plasminogen
• The complex induces
conformational change in
plasminogen exposing
active site
• The complex cleaves free
plasminogen to plasmin
Streptokinase binds both fibrin-bound and circulating plasminogen and it produces a systemic lytic state
12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Absolute and Relative Contraindications to Fibrinolytic Therapy
ABSOLUTE CONTRAINDICATIONS RELATIVE CONTRAINDICATIONS
Prior intracranial hemorrhage Uncontrolled hypertension
(SBP >180 mm Hg or DBP >110 mm Hg)
Known structural cerebral vascular lesion Traumatic or prolonged CPR or major surgery
within 3 weeks
Known malignant intracranial neoplasm Recent (within 2-4 weeks) internal bleeding
Ischemic stroke within 3 months Noncompressible vascular punctures
Suspected aortic dissection For streptokinase: prior exposure (>5 days ago)
or prior allergic reaction to streptokinase
Active bleeding or bleeding diathesis Pregnancy
(excluding menses)
Significant closed-head trauma or facial trauma Active peptic ulcer
within 3 months
Goodman & Gilman 13e Table 32-3 Current use of warfarin and INR >1.7
CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
INR, international normalized ratio
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Antiplatelet Agents
Aspirin
ADP Receptor Antagonists
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Inhibitors
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Antiplatelet agents decrease platelet aggregation for
the prevention of cardiovascular adverse events.
Sites of action of antiplatelet drugs:
• Aspirin inhibits TxA synthesis by irreversibly acetylating
2
COX-1. Reduced TxA release attenuates platelet
2
activation and recruitment to the site of vascular injury.
• Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and prasugrel irreversibly block
P2Y , a key ADP receptor on the platelet surface.
12
• Cangrelor and ticagrelor are reversible inhibitors of P2Y .
12
• Abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban inhibit the final
common pathway of platelet aggregation by blocking
fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor (vWF) from binding
to activated GPIIb/IIIa.
• Vorapaxar inhibits thrombin-mediated platelet activation
by targeting protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1), the
major thrombin receptor on platelets.
Citation: Chapter 36 Blood Coagulation and Anticoagulant, Fibrinolytic, and Antiplatelet Drugs, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 14e; 2023, figure 36-7. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=266700467 Accessed: April 11, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Platelet COX-1 Inhibitor
Aspirin
aspirin = acetylsalicylic acid
Thromboxane A (TXA ) is the major cyclooxygenase (COX-1) product in platelets. TXA has
2 2 2
autocrine / paracrine actions as a potent inducer of local platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction.
It activates adjacent platelets, amplifying the action of other platelet agonists.
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Aspirin Pharmacokinetics and Mechanism of Antiplatelet Action
Aspirin is taken up by platelets in the portal circulation before it is
deacetylated to salicylate on the first pass through the liver.
Mechanism:
• Oral
Aspirin irreversibly acetylates an allosteric site
• ASA esterases → salicylate

Inhibits TXA synthesis
o gut mucosa
2

o blood
TXA2 actions are prevented
o red blood cells 
reduces platelet aggregation and
o synovial tissues
vasoconstriction
• Salicylate: hepatic conjugation
• Effects lasts for the life of the platelet (7-10
• Renal excretion of
days).
o salicyluric acid (75%)
• Thus, repeated LOW doses of aspirin
o salicylic acid (10%)
produce a cumulative effect on platelet
• t½ in portal circulation ~20 min
function.
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Aspirin’s Antiplatelet Uses and Cautions
Dual therapy with P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for some indications.
Therapeutic Uses: Cautions:
Cardiovascular protection to reduce the risk
• Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
of thrombotic events – heart attack and
• Surgery: Avoid use1-2 weeks prior to
ischemic stroke – in high-risk patients
surgery except if patient has previous
Secondary prevention:
cardiac stent placement
• To reduce risk of subsequent CV disease
• Hypersensitivity: Aspirin-induced urticaria,
events
rhinosinusitis, bronchospasm,
Primary prevention
anaphylaxis
• High-risk patients with established CVD
• Pregnancy: Low doses for certain medical
• Intermediate- and high-risk in discussion
conditions have not been shown to cause
with patient regarding individual
fetal harm.
preferences and risk/benefit
Adjunct in revascularization procedures, such Recommended to discontinue prior to
as PCI, CABG, stenting delivery.
• Children with viral illness: Association with
Reye’s syndrome
PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention;
CABG: Coronary artery bypass graft 18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
ADP receptor antagonists:
P2Y Receptor Inhibitors
12
Irreversible inhibitors: Reversible inhibitors:
ADP receptor
antagonists
Thienopyridines: Ticagrelor
Clopidogrel Cangrelor
Prasugrel
P2Y is an ADP G PCR on platelets. Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase decreases cAMP concentrations
12 i
and leads to other downstream signaling events resulting in platelet aggregation.
P2Y is a platelet ADP GqPCR that activates the PLC–IP –Ca2+ pathway, which induces an activating
1 3
conformational change in GP IIb/IIIa receptors, resulting in platelet aggregation.
19
Both receptor types must be activated by ADP to cause platelet aggregation.
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Pharmacokinetics
Irreversible Inhibitors Reversible Inhibitors
Clopridogrel Prasugrel Ticagelor Cangrelor*
A Oral prodrug Oral prodrug Oral IV bolus f/b infusion
Onset Day 2 Onset <30 min Onset ~2 h T <2 min
max
D Protein binding 98% 98% (active metab) >99% 98%
M CYP2C19 conversion Hydrolysis then CYP3A4 Rapid
to active thiol metab CYP3A4, 2B6 to active active thiol metab dephosphorylation in
(15% of dose) thiol metab plasma, inactive
E Urine, feces Urine, feces Urine, feces Urine, feces
t½ Clopidogrel ~6 h Active metab ~7 h Ticagrelor ~24 h after 3-6 min
Active metab ~30 min drug is discontinued Rapid return of platelet
Platelet bound ~11 dys function
Activation of prasugrel is more efficient → *Cangrelor is an ADP
faster onset of action and greater, more analog
predictable inhibition of ADP-induced platelet
aggregation 20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Therapeutic Uses / Adverse Effects
Irreversible Inhibitors Reversible Inhibitors
Clopridogrel and Prasugrel Ticagelor Cangrelor
Dual therapy with aspirin • Acute coronary • Adjunct to PCI to
Secondary CV protection to reduce risk of syndrome: patients patients who have not
been treated with a P2Y
thrombotic events with a history of MI or
12
inhibitor or GP IIb/IIIa
• STEMI: following MI with or without reperfusion unstable angina
inhibitor
therapy • Coronary artery
• Bridging therapy prior
• Acute coronary syndrome: After non-STEMI or disease, stable
to cardiac surgery
in unstable angina (primary prevention)
following
• PCI: After bare metal stent or drug-eluting • Minor ischemic
thienopyridine
stent placement stroke
discontinuation
• Patients intolerant to aspirin after STEMI
Adverse effects: All antiplatelet drugs are associated with bleeding.
CYP2C19 poor Bleeding, higher rates • Thrombocytopenic Bleeding
metabolizers → than with clopidogrel purpura
conversion to active • Not recommended in • Bradyarrhythmia
thiol patients 75 years • Dyspnea (resolves)
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Receptor Antagonists
Eptifibatide
Tirofiban
GP Iib/IIIa is a platelet-surface integrin
complex. (~80,000 are present on platelet
surface.) They are inactive on resting platelets.
Activation of platelets leads to a
conformational change and activation.
GP Iib/IIIa bind fibrinogen, which anchors
platelets to each other and to endothelial cells.
Abciximab is Fab fragments of an immunoglobulin that targets GP IIb/IIIa.
It is no longer manufactured and is not included in this presentation. 22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
GP IIIb/IIIa Inhibitors: Pharmacology
Eptifibatide Tirofiban
Cyclic heptapeptide Synthetic nonpeptide GP IIIb/IIIa Inhibitors reversibly block
platelet aggregation induced by any
t½ ~2.5 hours t½ ~2 hours
agonist.
IV bolus IV bolus

Platelet function restored in Platelet function restored in
reversibly block fibrinogen binding
~4 hours 4-8 hours and bridging of platelets

Contraindications prevent platelet aggregation
Active abnormal bleeding Severe hypertension not
within the previous 30 days adequately controlled on
History of bleeding diathesis medication
History of stroke within 30 Major surgery within the
days preceding 6 weeks
History of hemorrhagic Dependency on hemodialysis
stroke History of intracranial disease
PT >1.2 times control or INR Thrombocytopenia
2.0 Hypersensitivity
23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Antidotes
Protamine sulfate
Vitamin K
Prothrombin Complex concentrate
Idarucizumab
Andexanet alfa (apixaban and rivaroxaban reversal)
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Agents for Reversal of Anticoagulant Activity
Antidote Anticoagulant Mechanism
Protamine Heparin Highly cationic protein combines with acidic UHF and
LMWH forming stable complex that is excreted
• Acts in ~5 minutes; t½ ~7 minutes
• Protamine has weak anticoagulant effects, therefore
excessive protamine dosing may worsen bleeding.
Vitamin K Warfarin Outcompetes warfarin at VKORC1
Phytonadione • Oral onset of action 6-10 hours; INR returns to normal in
24-48h; may cause warfarin resistance
Prothrombin Urgent 4-factor PCC increases the levels of vitamin K-depended
complex reversal of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X plus protein C and S
concentrate VKAs and • May predispose the patient to a thromboembolic
(also FFP) DOACs complication (weigh risk v benefit)
Idarucizumab Oral direct MAb fragment that specifically binds dabigatran and its
thrombin active acyglucuronide metabolites
inhibitor • Onset in minutes; duration 24h or more
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Summary
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Thrombolytics and Antiplatelet Agents
tPA: Alteplase, Tenecteplase, Reteplase
Plasminogen
Thrombolytics Streptokinase
activators
Treatment of arterial Urokinase
and venous thrombosis
COX inhibitor Aspirin
Abciximab
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Eptifibatide
inhibitors
Antiplatelet agents Tirofiban
Treatment and prevention of
Clopridogrel
occlusive cardiovascular diseases
and maintenance of vascular
Prasugrel
ADP receptor inhibitors
grafts and arterial patency
(P2Y component)
12 Ticagrelor
Cangrelor
--- SLIDE 28 ---
SUMMARY OF FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS
Streptokinase • 47,000 Da protein produced by -hemolytic streptococci
(n/a in U.S.) • It has no intrinsic enzymatic activity
• 1:1 complex with plasminogen → conformational change → exposes plasminogen’s
active site → complex cleaves circulating (free) plasminogen → forms plasmin
• Activates both free and fibrin-bound plasminogen  lytic state
• Cross reactivity with circulating anti-streptococcal antibodies → may cause allergic
reactions or neutralize the activity of streptokinase
Urokinase • Human enzyme synthesized by the kidney
• Directly converts plasminogen to plasmin
• Activates both free and fibrin-bound plasminogen
Alteplase • Recombinant t-PA
(t½ 5 min) • Preferentially activates plasminogen bound to fibrin
Reteplase • Recombinant t-PA variant; lacks the finger, EGF, and first kringle domains → more
(t½ 13-16 min) weakly binding of fibrin; longer t½ (2 bolus doses)
Tenecteplase • Recombinant t-PA variant; longer t½ (1 bolus dose)
(t½ 90-130 min) • Relatively resistant to plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 compared to alteplase and
reteplase
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Summary of Antiplatelet Agents
• Aspirin acetylates cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and inhibiting TXA2 synthesis.
Low-dose aspirin effectively inhibiting platelet aggregation for 5 to 7 days (the
life of the platelet).
• ADP receptor P2Y12 inhibitors prevent activation of the GP IIb/IIIa receptor
complex, thus preventing fibrinogen cross-linking. Clopidogrel and prasugrel
(thienopyridines) are irreversible inhibitors. Reversible inhibitors are ticagrelor
(oral) and cangrelor (I.V.)
• GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban block platelet
aggregation by blocking the binding of fibrinogen, thereby preventing fibrinogen
cross-linking.
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R