SOURCE: Lecture # 169. C. Abraham, M.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Opportunistic Infections in
Adults
Dr. Carl J. Abraham, Jr.
Clinical Medicine, Arkansas
cabrah04@nyit.edu
Office of Academic Affairs
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Session Objectives
At the conclusion of the session/course, the student
should be able to:
1. Discuss the various mechanisms of acquired
immune deficiency.
2. Gauge the type and severity of immune deficiency
in a patient presenting with opportunistic infection.
3. Differentiate opportunistic pathogens that may
present in patients with immune deficiency.
4. Diagnose, treat and manage and patient with severe
immune deficiency secondary to AIDS.
5. Identify the risk factors for immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome.
Source: Course Syllabus
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Design
1. Definitions
2. Hematopoietic, Solid Organ Transplant and Myeloablation
3. HIV/AIDS
4. Opportunistic Organisms (Selected)
Each slide is a single concept
*Pause* points
There is no way to completely cover this vast concept in a single
lecture. You will have to research this subject on your own in
order to fill the gaps.
--- SLIDE 4 ---
What is immune deficiency?
• A defect of innate or adaptive immunity resulting in increased risk of:
• Infection
Illustration: The innate and the adaptive immune systems
• Common, opportunistic pathogens
and saprophytes
• Newly acquired, commensal or reactivation
• Malignancy
• Examples
• Breaching of natural barriers
• Advanced HIV/AIDS
• Myelosuppressive chemotherapy
• Immune suppression for
• Autoimmune illness
• Prevention of transplant rejection
• Asplenia
• Corticosteroids equivalent to prednisone ≥20 mg/day for ≥4 weeks
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Question
Clostridium difficile colitis is a result of
breaching what immune barrier?
1. Skin
2. Mucous membrane
3. Commensal flora
4. Humoral (antibody)
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Question
Staphylococcus epidermidis central venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection is the
result of breaching what immune barrier?
1. Skin
2. Mucous membrane
3. Commensal flora
4. Humoral (antibody)
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Full size image for
What is an Opportunistic Infection?
'Obsessive-compulsive Disorder
and Obsessive-compulsive and
Related Disorders'
Full size image for
• An infection that does not typically occur 'Central-line bundles need a
multimodal
implementation strategy'
in the immune competent host
• Commensal organisms: Staphylococcus epidermidis
• Microbiome imbalance: Clostridium difficile
• Pharmaceuticals: Lactobacillus
• Tap water: Mycobacterium avium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Legionella
pneumophila
image
• Reactivation:
HSV, CMV, EBV,
Toxoplasma,
M. tuberculosis
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Question
Which of the following is a risk for recurrent
Neisseria infections?
1. Systemic lupus erythematosus
2. Complement deficiency C5
3. Eculizumab
4. Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Types of Immune Deficiencies
Deficiency Examples Organisms
Extremes of age Birth, elderly Zoster
Broad-spectrum abx Sepsis Pseudomonas
Resistant organisms rx Candida
Foreign bodies Central venous catheter Staphylococcus epidermidis, S. aureus, enterococci, Corynebacterium
Urinary catheter Candida
Joint replacement
Heart valve replacement
Pacemaker
Trauma Penetrating injury S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Surgery
Burns
Chronic illness Diabetes Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis, enteric Gram negatives,
Chronic renal failure Pseudomonas, Streptococcus pneumoniae
COPD, cystic fibrosis Haemophilus influenzae, NTMB
Complement Properdin deficiency Neisseria infections
SLE
Eculizumab
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Question
Increased risk of infection with which of the
following organisms occurs after
autosplenectomy?
1. Babesia
2. Streptococcus pneumoniae
3. Capnocytophagia
4. Staphylococcus epidermidis
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Types of Immune Deficiencies
Deficiency Examples Organisms
Alpha-4 (α4) integrin Natalizumab PML
Humoral Bruton’s Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningiditis, Streptococcus
Multiple myeloma pneumoniae, Capnocytophagia
CLL Babesiosis
Small lymphocyte lymphoma
Splenectomy
Common variable immunodeficiency
Granulocytopenia Hematopoietic cell transplantation Gram-negative enterics, Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus aureus, S.
Myelosuppressive chemotherapy epidermidis, Viridans streptococci
Acute leukemia Candida, Aspergillus, Trichosporon, Scedosporium, Fusarium,
mucormycosis
Cellular immunity HIV infection Listeria, Legionella, Salmonella, Mycobacterium
Lymphoreticular malignancies HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV, HBV, HCV
Corticosteroids, cyclosporine, tacrolimus Cryptococcus, Coccidioides, Histoplasma, Pneumocystis
Solid organ transplantation Toxoplasma
TNF inhibitors
Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Question
Risk of infection by Aspergillus sp. Is increased
in which phase of allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplant?
1. Pretransplantation
2. Pre-engraftment (1 – 21 days)
3. Post-engraftment (3 weeks – 3 months)
4. > 3 months
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation
• Early post-transplant (pre-engraftment) 1-21 days
• Severe neutropenia up to 21 days
• Staphylococci, gram-negative, HSV, RSV, Candida, Aspergillus
• 3 weeks – 3 months (post-engraftment)
• CMV, adenovirus, Aspergillus, Candida, Pneumocystis
• >3 months
• VZV, Aspergillus, CMV
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Question
Which of the following has the highest risk of
CMV infection after solid organ transplant?
1. CMV positive donor, CMV positive recipient
2. CMV positive donor, CMV negative recipient
3. CMV negative donor, CMV negative recipient
4. CMV negative donor, CMV positive recipient
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Solid Organ Transplantation
• Immediate postoperative
• Infections involving transplanted organ
• 2-4 weeks posttransplant
• Wound, IV catheter, UTI
Risk of posttransplant CMV infection (1-6 months)
• Transplanted infections High risk—CMV Ab (−) recipient, CMVAb (+) donor
Intermediate risk—CMV Ab (+) recipient,
CMVAb (+) or Ab (−) donor
• 1-6 months posttransplant
Lowest risk—CMV Ab (−) recipient,CMVAb (−) donor
• HSV, VZV, CMV, Candida, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus,
Pneumocystis, Listeria monocytogenes, Nocardia,
Toxoplasma
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Question
Which of the following increases risk of
infection in patients with absolute neutropenia?
1. Duration >7 days
2. Duration <7 days
3. Granulocyte count >500/ml
4. Granulocyte count >1000/ml
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Myeloablative (cytotoxic) Chemotherapy
• +/- irradiation
• Mucosal barrier damage
• Oral and gut organisms
• Neutropenia
• Infection risk increases
when neutrophils <1000/ml
• “Absolute” neutropenia <500/ml
• Extremely high-risk for infection <100/ml
• Risk of infection increases with duration >7 days
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Bobby
• Bobby, a 39-year-old male has fever, cough and SOB.
He was diagnosed with HIV/AIDS 10 years ago and was placed
on ART. CD4 went from 150 to 775/ml and viral load was
undetectable. He was lost to follow up 8 years ago.
He reported 3 weeks of progressively worse cough
accompanied by at first fever less than 37.7 ⁰C (100⁰F) for the
last week as high as 39.4⁰C (103⁰F) accompanied by shaking
chills. For the last 1½ weeks he has had progressive SOB, at first
only on exertion and now at rest.
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Bobby
He explains that 8 years ago he broke up with his
partner of 4 years and returned to using injection
drugs, mostly heroin. He stopped taking ART then and
over the last year has been feeling unwell. He has lost
35 pounds and was hospitalized 8 months ago for 5
days with pneumonia. He has not otherwise seen a
physician.
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Bobby
Exam is significant for:
A thin male in respiratory distress unable to finish full sentences.
RR 28, BP 93/58, HR 124, T 38.3⁰C (101⁰F), Wt 84 lbs., Ht 5’10”
He has no rash. White cottage cheese-like exudate is easily
scraped off the buccal mucosa (consistent with oral candidiasis).
Shoddy axillary nodes are present. Lung fields are clear, and
percussion is normal. Thoracic paraspinous skin drag is prolonged
at T1-T4 bilaterally.
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Bobby
He is admitted to the ICU, placed on mechanical
ventilation. CBC shows pancytopenia. Chest x-ray
shows bilateral interstitial and ground-glass opacities
without effusions.
A procedure is done.
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Bobby
1. What procedure do you think was done?
2. What antibiotics would you start?
*Pause*
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Advanced HIV/AIDS
• Humoral and cell-mediated immune deficiency
CD4 Opportunistic Infections
<500 Candida alibicans (thrush)
EBV (oral hairy leukoplakia)
Bartonella henselae
HHV-8
HPV
<200 Pneumocystis jirovecii
Histoplasma capsulatum
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)
<100 Cerebral toxoplasmosis
Aspergillus fumigatus
Cryptosporidium
EBV-associated B-cell lymphoma
<50 CMV retinitis
Cryptococcal meningitis
Esophageal candidiasis
M. avium/intracellulare
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Bobby
• The differential diagnosis in those with severe
combined immune deficiency is broad. For
those with advanced HIV/AIDS, critically ill and
ground glass, pulmonary opacities on CxR:
• Pneumocystitis jirovecii pneumonia, tuberculosis, S.
pneumoniae, S. aureus (including MRSA), P. aeruginosa,
influenza, HSV, CMV, VZV, Histoplasma, Coccidioides,
pulmonary lymphoma with lymphangitic spread, acute
pulmonary edema, ARDS
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Question
Which of the following is most common
opportunistic infection in persons living with
AIDS not on antiretroviral therapy?
1. Cytomegalovirus retinitis
2. Mycobacterium avium/intracellulare
3. Cryptococcal meningitis
4. Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Question
The reservoir of Pneumocystis jirovecii is
1. Avian droppings
2. Mammalian lungs
3. Swine intestines
4. Sneakers (running shoes)
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Question
Which of the following is true regarding
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia?
1. It is a “typical” pneumonia
2. Risk is increased with short course steroids
3. Pulmonary exam reveals rales
4. Sputum and hemoptysis are present
5. None of the above
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Photo of x-ray of a lung with tuberculosis
• Fungal pathogen causing widespread
asymptomatic infection in mammals
• Transmission: inhalation person-to-person
• Risk: cell-mediated immune deficiency (AIDS #1, steroids)
• Presentation: CD4<200, subacute pulmonary symptoms
beginning with nonproductive cough, fever followed
by progressively worsening SOB
• Exam: Lungs usually quiet
• CxR: bilateral interstitial ground glass opacities
without effusion
• Diagnosed by:
• Methenamine silver stain of tissue, PCR or antigen
of saliva/bronchoalveolar lavage
• Pathology: foamy macrophages
• Beta-D-glucan of blood, ↑LDH
• Treatment: TMP/SMZ, prednisone in severe cases. SMZ allergy:
pentamidine, or if mild-moderate, atovaquone, dapsone
• Prophylaxis: TMP/SMZ, dapsone, pentamidine
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Question
A 74-year-old man living with AIDS, CD4 48/ml,
presents with odynophagia and weight loss? EGD
shows long, deep linear esophageal ulceration. Which
test would most likely result in a diagnosis?
1. Tzanck smear
2. PCR
3. Gram stain
4. Germ tube
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Treatment of Cytomegalovirus Retinitis in Patients with the
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome | NEJM
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
• Beta herpesviridae
• Transmission: infection in childhood, lifelong
latent infection, reactivation disease, organ donation
• Risk: cell-mediated immune deficiency
(AIDS, organ transplant), elderly
• Presentation: CD4<50, retinitis - visual loss/floaters, flashing lights,
pneumonitis –SOB, cough, ulcerative esophagitis - dysphagia, colitis – diarrhea,
transplant failure
• Exam: retinal flame hemorrhages and cotton wool spots,
EGD - Long, deep, linear ulcers, CxR - bilateral ground glass opacities without effusion
Diagnosed by:
• Clinically on retinal exam
• Blood/tissue PCR Full size image for 'Cytomegalovirus'
• Tissue biopsy: Owl’s eye inclusion bodies
• Treatment: ganciclovir (IV, intravitreal), valganciclovir (oral), cidofovir, foscarnet
• Prophylaxis: valganciclovir
Risk of posttransplant CMV infection (1-6 months)
High risk—CMV Ab (−) recipient, CMVAb (+) donor
Intermediate risk—CMV Ab (+) recipient,CMVAb (+) or Ab (−) donor
Lowest risk—CMV Ab (−) recipient,CMVAb (−) donor
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Question
A 74-year-old man living with AIDS, CD4 48/ml, presents with
confusion and auditory hallucinations. MRI shows hyperintense
lesion in the left temporal lobe. Transmission of the causative
organism most likely occurred by which route?
1. Airborne
2. Skin-to-skin contact
3. Ingestion of spores
4. Fecal-oral
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV)
• Alpha herpesviridae
• Transmission: infection during or after childhood, latent infection,
reactivation disease
• Risk: cell-mediated immune deficiency (AIDS, organ transplant), elderly
• Presentation: CD4<50, retinitis - visual loss, acute retinal necrosis An M R I scan image of the brain shows an arrow A picture containing fruit
painful, chronic oral ulcers – oral pain pointing to fluid attenuated inversion recovery
hyperintensity in the left temporal lobe and left Description automatically generated
esophagitis – odynophagia insula.
tracheobronchitis – chest pain,
pneumonitis –SOB, cough,
colitis - diarrhea
encephalitis – confusion, altered consciousness, hallucinations
• Exam: retinal pale peripheral lesions with central necrosis,
EGD: crops of vesicles, shallow ulcers
A picture containing background pattern
CT chest: bilateral ground glass opacities without effusion
Description automatically generated
• MRI brain: hyperintensity of unilateral temporal lobe
Diagnosed by:
• PCR of ulcer, tissue, CSF
• Tissue biopsy: Multinucleate giant cells on Tzanck test
• Treatment: acyclovir (IV, oral), foscarnet, famciclovir, valacyclovir
• Prophylaxis: acyclovir
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Question
A 74-year-old man living with AIDS, CD4 48/ml, presents with a
vesicular rash in a left T4 dermatomal distribution. There 3
similar lesions that cross the midline by ~1 cm and 5-6 more
lesions are distant from the dermatome. What is the most likely
causative organism?
1. Varicella zoster virus (VZV)
2. Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1)
3. Herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2)
4. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Full size image for 'Varicella Pneumonia in a
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Positive Adult'
Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV)
• Alpha herpesviridae
• Transmission: infection during childhood (unvaccinated),
latent infection, reactivation disease;
primary infection in vaccinated, immune suppressed
• Risk: cell-mediated immune deficiency (AIDS,
organ transplant), elderly
• Presentation: zoster in elderly
CD4<200, retinitis - visual loss,
CD4<50 acute retinal necrosis
View Image - Figure 5Extensive posterior outer retinal necrosis in two HIV infected patients. (A) Herpes simplex virus
pneumonitis –SOB, cough, type 2. (B) Varicella zoster virus.
encephalitis – confusion, altered consciousness
• Exam: retinal diffuse flame hemorrhages
CT chest: nodular densities +/- surrounding ground glass attenuation
Diagnosed by:
• PCR of ulcer, tissue, CSF
• Tissue biopsy: Multinucleate giant cells on Tzanck test
• Treatment: acyclovir (IV, oral), famciclovir, valacyclovir
• Prophylaxis: acyclovir, vaccine,
varicella zoster virus immune globulin
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Bobby
TMP/SMZ IV, prednisone, vancomycin, meropenem
and fluconazole are begun.
Labs: CD4 3, HIV-1 PCR >1,000,000/ml, LDH 949
(elevated), blood cultures, beta-D-glucan and CMV PCR
neg, pancytopenia, elevated transamininases, acute
renal insufficiency.
Sputum by tracheal suction was Pneumocystis
antigen positive.
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Bobby
Procedure?
Definition of bronchoscopy - NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms - National Cancer
Institute
Bronchial biopsy shows foamy
macrophages. Methamine silver
stain shows Pneumocystis-like
organisms. Bacterial and fungal
cultures and viral respiratory
panel of bronchoalveolar lavage
are negative.
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Bobby
Vancomycin and meropenem are discontinued.
Oxygenation improves. He is extubated, LDH
normalizes and on hospital day 5 transfers to the acute
ward on oxygen by nasal cannula. On hospital day 8, he
complains of severe odynophagia. Oral examination
reveals resolution of oral candidiasis.
What procedure is performed?
*Pause*
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Bobby
EGD* shows, deep, long,
linear ulcerations in the
mid esophagus.
*Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Question
Match the figures A, B and C with the causative organism.
1. Cytomegalovirus
2. Herpes simplex
3. Candida sp.
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Opportunistic
Esophagitis
• Odynophagia in an immune compromised host
A. Candida albicans: mucoid, cottage cheese exudate
Gram stain. Germ tube. High dose fluconazole.
B. CMV: long deep, linear ulcer. Tzanck or PCR.
Ganciclovir IV → valganciclovir.
C. HSV: crops of shallow ulcers. Tzanck or PCR.
Valacyclovir, acyclovir IV/PO.
--- SLIDE 41 ---
Bobby
CMV PCR of an ulcer is positive. Ganciclovir IV is begun, and
odynophagia improves. Three days later on hospital day 12, he
has new chills associated with diaphoresis and tachycardia. He
has no fever. He has also noted mild axillary submental and
inguinal adenopathy. Pancytopenia persists. Alkaline
phosphatase increases to 4x normal. Mycobacterial sputum and
blood cultures obtained on admission are reported from the lab
to be growing an organism.
What procedure is performed?
*Pause*
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Question
A 32-year-old man living with AIDS, CD4 2/ml, presents fever,
chills, adenopathy and severe anemia. Bone marrow biopsy
shows organisms that stain with Ziehl-Neelsen. Treatment of
this organism should start with which of the following?
1. Ethambutol and rifampin
2. Azithromycin and ethambutol
3. Clarithromycin and rifampin
4. Isoniazid and rifampin
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Question
Which of the following is given for primary prophylaxis for the
causative organism of the last question?
1. Azithromycin
2. Clarithromycin
3. Ciprofloxacin
4. None of the above
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Mycobacterium avium/intracellulare (MAI)
• Ubiquitous, water-borne organism
• Rapidly growing, non-tuberculous mycobacteria A picture containing fabric
Description automatically generated
• AIDS: CD4 <50
• Fever, weight loss, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy,
elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, cytopenias
• Diagnosis mycobacterial blood culture, bone
marrow biopsy, PCR, Ziehl-Neelsen stain
• Treatment with clarithromycin or azithromycin
(test for resistance!) and ethambutol
• Prophylaxis: no longer given due to ART efficacy
• Lady Windermere’s Syndrome – MST1R mutation
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Bobby
Bone marrow biopsy shows organisms on Ziehl-Neelsen stain
and sputum PCR is positive for MAI. Azithromycin and
ethambutol are begun. TMP/SMZ, prednisone, valganciclovir are
continued. On hospital day 16, he complains of a vague
headache that may have been present for several days, but
today is severe enough to be bothersome and he notes mild-
moderate neck stiffness.
What procedure is performed?
*Pause*
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Meningitis in AIDS
• DDx: Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma
capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, M. tuberculosis,
syphilis, Listeria, Lymphomatous, aseptic
• Fever, headache, photophobia, neck stiffness
C. neoformans may be asymptomatic
Altered mental status may indicate increased
intracranial pressure, risk for uncal herniation
• Dx: Lumbar puncture
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Question
The organism that most commonly causes meningitis in those
living with advanced AIDS is associated with which of the
following?
1. Travel to the southwest U.S.
2. Exposure to arboreal species
3. Acute retinal necrosis
4. Asymptomatic infection
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Cryptococcus
• Yeast-like fungus derived from soil contaminated with avian droppings (C.
image
neoformans) or arboreal species (C. gattii)
• AIDS CD4 <50/ml, hematologic malignancy, solid organ transplant,
corticosteroids
• Most common cause of meningitis in persons living with AIDS
• Inhalation of yeasts that disseminate to meninges
• Capsule is antiphagocytic and capsular polysaccharide (antigen) actively
prevents immune response
An image of a stained section shows the presence of
cryptococcal antigen.
• Fever, headache, photophobia, neck stiffness
• LP: ↓glucose, ↑protein, mononuclear WBCs, and opening pressure. CSF
India ink, cryptococcal antigen titer
image
Blood: serum cryptococcal antigen
Bronchial fluids: mucicarmine or
methenamine silver stains
• Treatment: liposomal amphotericin B and
flucytosine followed by oral fluconazole
• Prophylaxis: fluconazole
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Other Cerebral Opportunistic Infections
A. Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML)
• JC polyomavirus (nonenveloped, circular dsDNA)
• Immune competent: 90% are infected (asymptomatic)
Immune suppressed, (CD4 <50, natalizumab): Uni- or multifocal cerebral demyelination
• Subacute cognitive impairment, focal motor deficits, and seizures, MRI brain shows demyelinating
lesions
• MRI: White matter demyelinating lesions
• DDx: AIDS dementia complex, CMV encephalitis, infarction
• Dx: CSF JC virus NAT
• Treatment: ART
B. Toxoplasma gondii
• Protozoan parasitic infection
• Ingestion of tissue cysts in raw or undercooked meat, mother to fetus
• Immune competent: asymptomatic, seizures from calcified cerebral cysts, chorioretinitis
Immune suppressed (CD4 <50): chorioretinitis,
• Fever, headache, confusion, motor defects, and seizures
• CT or MRI: space-occupying gray matter lesion
• DDx: lymphoma
• Dx: CSF Toxoplasma PCR, serology, pathology
• Treatment: sulfadiazine-pyrimethamine or clindamycin-pyrimethamine
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Bobby
Lumbar puncture shows glucose of 10 mg/dl, protein 220
mg/dl, WBC 1200/ml with 80% mononuclear cells. India ink is
positive and cryptococcal antigen titer is 1:64. Opening pressure
was 22 mmH O.
2
Liposomal amphotericin B and flucytosine are begun with the plan to
switch to oral fluconazole in 2 weeks. His headache and meningismus
improve. Discharge planning is begun and his medications at home will also
include TMP/SMZ, valganciclovir, azithromycin and ethambutol.
When Bobby asks why is not going home on ART, what do you
tell him?
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Question
Which of the following organisms is associated with immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome when ART is begun when
the CD4 is 200?
1. Mycobacterium avium adenitis
2. Tuberculosis
3. Cytomegalovirus retinitis
4. Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonitis
--- SLIDE 52 ---
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS)
• Initiation of ART results in • Manifestations and treatment
inflammatory reaction that results dependent on organ and organism
in tissue injury • Mycobacterium tuberculosis
• Unmasking IRIS: Undiagnosed, • Mycobacterium avium complex
occult infection • Cytomegalovirus
• Cryptococcus neoformans
• Paradoxical IRIS: Residual antigenic
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
stimulation
• Herpes simplex virus
• CD4 prior to ART usually <100 (TB
• Hepatitis B virus
<200)
• Human herpes virus 8 (associated with
• Occurs in up to 13% one week to Kaposi sarcoma)
3-4 months after ART initiation • PML
• Prevention: treat known infection
2-4 weeks prior to initiating ART
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Question
Match each figure with the causative infecting organism.
image
Full size image for
1. Human herpesvirus 8 'Central-line bundles need a
multimodal
implementation strategy'
2. Staphylococcus epidermidis
3. Bartonella henselae
4. Herpes simplex 2
5. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
image
--- SLIDE 54 ---
Question
Match each figure with the causative infecting organism.
1. Mycobacterium avium
2. Cryptococcus neoformans
3. Cytomegalovirus
4. Herpes simplex 1
image Full size image for 'Cytomegalovirus'
5. Pneumocystis jirovecii
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Question
Match each figure with the causative infecting organism.
Full size image for 'Varicella Pneumonia in a
1. Varicella zoster virus Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Positive Adult'
2. Toxoplasma gondii
3. JC virus
4. Herpes simplex 1
5. Lymphoma
An M R I scan image of the brain shows an
arrow pointing to fluid attenuated inversion
recovery hyperintensity in the left temporal
lobe and left insula.
--- SLIDE 56 ---
Discussion
What is the importance of an AIDS-definition?
--- SLIDE 57 ---
• cabrah04@nyit.edu
• Office hours: Thursday 1-2 pm CST (2-3 pm
EST)
Answer keys will be released in the future for
the questions in this lecture
• Lecture Feedback Form on Canvas
• Wilson Hall: Office 424C