SOURCE: Lecture # 172. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Antimalarial Agents
Chemoprophylaxis and Treatment of Malaria
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
Rockefeller Building, Room 204
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Following completion of the learning materials, students should be able to:
1. Define the terms exoerythrocytic stage, erythrocytic stage, schizont stage, schizogony,
merozoite, latent liver stage, schizonticide, gametocide, hypnozoite, and hemozoin.
2. Differentiate the clinical approaches to malaria prophylaxis and treatment.
3. Apply the clinical selection of the various antimalarial drugs to their mechanisms of action,
mechanisms of resistance, and geographical resistance patterns.
4. Relate the adverse effects of the antimalarial drugs to their therapeutic effects and give
examples.
5. Explain the mechanism of toxicity and the effects of the drugs to be avoided in patients with
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
6. List the clinically relevant pharmacokinetic properties of the various chemotherapeutic agents
used in the treatment of malarial infections and give examples.
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions (questions FOR learning)
Highly relevant optional materials:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: General Microbiology > Antiparasitic Drugs
Title of Brick: Drugs to treat protozoal and helminthic infections – the section on Malaria
Link: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-protozoal-and-helminthic-infections
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal Drugs > Malaria
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755910#1204144707
The review books include practice questions in their chapters.
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology 8e, 2023; Chapter 35
Antiprotozoal Drugs > Malaria https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329448&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 1e, 2024; Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal Drugs
> Malaria
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285
599695#1207306375
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Outline
1. Overview of malaria-endemic countries
2. Plasmodium life cycle
3. Clinical features of malaria
4. Goals of therapy
5. Prophylaxis and treatment of malaria
6. Pharmacology of the individual antimalarial drugs
7. Check your knowledge questions
8. Summary
5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Here are the TAKEAWAYS of malaria prophylaxis and treatment
• Malaria is caused by Plasmodium protozoan parasites transmitted by the bite of Anopheles mosqitoes. P.
falciparum is the most widespread and deadliest malaria parasite.
• Prevention measures include personal protection using insect repellent, wearing long sleeves and pants, and
sleeping under an insecticide treated bed net.
• Chemoprophylaxis is based on travel destination, duration of stay, and individual health considerations. Long-acting
agents are used.
• Chloroquine is preferred for prophylaxis in infections caused by non-falciparum species and in regions without P.
falciparum resistance. However, P. falciparum resistance is widespread.
• Atovaquone-proguanil, doxycycline, and mefloquine are used in chloroquine-resistance areas.
• Treatment involves combining a rapid-acting drug with a short duration of action and a long-acting drug with a
longer half-life to provide extended duration of activity. The combination is also intended to reduce the development
of parasite resistance to the drug therapy.
• Preferred treatment for uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria, and malaria caused by other Plasmodium species, is
oral artemisinin combination therapy (ACT). ACT treatment duration is 3 days (in the absence of partial resistance
to the artemisinins). Chloroquine may be used for treatment of chloroquine-sensitive malaria. Preferred treatment of
severe P. falciparum malaria, which can be fatal, is parenteral artesunate (an artemisinin).
• Treatment of pregnant and pediatric patients follows the same principles and utilizes antimalarial drugs with
evidence of safety and efficacy for these populations.
• P. vivax and P. ovale remain dormant in the liver as hypnozoites and can reactivate weeks, months, or years after
initial infection, causing relapse. Primaquine and tafenoquine erradicate hypnozoites. Patients should be screened
for G6PD deficiency prior to administration of these drugs. 6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Key points: Malaria and Clinical Management Overview
• Malaria is an acute infectious disease. Five species of the protozoa Plasmodium cause human malaria,
which is transmitted to humans by the female Anopheles mosquito. Travelers to malarious regions and
young children in endemic regions are at highest risk for severe disease.
• P. falciparum is the primary cause of severe malaria, an acute, rapidly progressive severe illness
characterized by persistent high fever, hyperparasitemia, cerebral symptoms, organ system dysfunction, and
death.
• P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, and P. knowlesi can also cause significant illness. P. vivax can cause severe
anemia. P. ovale can also cause anemia and splenomegaly. P. vivax and P. ovale species remain dormant in
the liver (hypnozoite stage) and cause relapse weeks, months, or years later. P. malariae typically results in
chronic low level parasitemia, but can cause severe anemia and other complications. P. knowlesi, an
uncommon form of malaria in Southeast Asia previously thought to infect only nonhuman primates
(macaques), causes human infections, sometimes severe with complications similar to those caused by P.
falciparum.
Clinical management of malaria depends on the severity, age of the patient, presence or absence of acquired
immunity, drug resistance patterns, and availability of drugs.
Antimalarial drugs are used for prevention of malaria and its complications in vulnerable populations, such as
non-immune travelers, infants and children at high risk of severe disease, pregnant people, and for treatment of
uncomplicated and severe malaria.
Antimalarial drugs can be classified based on their activities during the Plasmodium life cycle as well as by their
7
intended use for either chemoprophylaxis or treatment.
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Key points: Chemoprophylaxis and Treatment Overview
Chemoprophylaxis: Drugs can only prevent the development of symptomatic malaria caused by the
asexual erythrocytic forms.
In other words, preventive use of antimalarial drugs is intended to kill the asexual erythrocytic parasites
before they increase sufficiently in number to cause clinical disease.
Treatment of established infection: No single antimalarial is effective against the erythrocytic stages
and liver stages of the life cycle that may co-exist in the same patient.
In other words, no single antimalarial drug can effect a radical cure (eliminate both latent hepatic and
erythrocytic stages of P. vivax and P. ovale).
 More than one drug is required to completely eliminate both the erythrocytic and liver infection.
➢ Patients on malaria prophylaxis who develop malaria infection should receive a different medication
for treatment.
Blood schizonticides commonly used for chemoprophylaxis include chloroquine (chloroquine-sensitive
regions), atovaquone-proguanil, and mefloquine.
For treatment of uncomplicated and severe malaria, the artemisinins partnered with a long-acting drug
such as lumefantrine, mefloquine, or atovaquone-proguanil are first line. Quinine partnered with
doxycycline or tetracycline is an alternative treatment regimen. Chloroquine is preferred for non-falciparum
malaria.
Primaquine and tafenoquine are effective against the dormant hypnozoites of P. vivax and P. ovale.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Definitions
Exoerythrocytic stage the phase of the life cycle of malaria parasites in the liver cells of the host before the malaria
parasites invade the red blood cells. The parasites develop and multiply within the liver
during this stage.
Erythrocytic stage the phase in the life cycle of malaria parasites where they infect and multiply within red blood
cells (erythrocytes) of the host
Schizont stage the phase in the life cycle when the parasite undergoes asexual reproduction (schizogony)
Schizogony within hepatocytes after the initial infection and then in red blood cells. The parasite nucleus
Merozoites divides multiple times, producing thousands of daughter cells (merozoites), which invade red
blood cells.
Latent liver stage a dormant phase of the malaria parasites P. vivax and P. ovale in the liver, where they remain
inactive for a period before potentially causing a relapse of the disease
Schizonticide a drug that specifically targets and destroys the schizont stage of a sporozoan parasite, such
as those causing malaria
Gametocide a drug that destroys the gametocytes (sexual forms) of malaria parasites, preventing them
from being transmitted to mosquitoes
Hypnozoite a dormant form of P. vivax and P. ovale in the liver, which can cause relapses in infections
Hemozoin iron-containing pigment that is a breakdown product of hemoglobin. Malaria parasites digest
hemoglobin releasing free heme, which is toxic to cells. The parasites convert the free heme
to hemozoin, an insoluble crystalline form that is not toxic to the malaria parasite. 9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Geographic distribution of malaria
parasites:
P. falciparum:
sub-Saharan Africa, South America,
Southeast Asia, India – the most
widespread and deadliest malaria
parasite.
P. vivax:
Asia, Latin America, some parts of
Africa
P. ovale:
West Africa primarily
P. malariae:
sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia,
Indonesia, parts of the Amazon Basin
P. knowlesi:
Southeast Asia (Malaysia, Thailand,
Vietnam, Indonesia)
transmitted via the bite of anopheles
mosquito from macaques to humans Global distribution of malaria in 2017.1 (Source: Reprinted with permission of the World Health Organization.)
Citation: Chapter 89 Malaria, Boulton ML, Wallace RB. Maxcy-Rosenau-Last Public Health & Preventive Medicine, 16e; 2022. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=257463282&bookid=3078&Resultclick=2 Accessed: March 24, 2024
Copyright © 2024 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Current geographic extent of artemisinin resistance and artemisinin-based combination therapy partner
drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum in the Greater Mekong subregion.
Citation: Chapter 224 Malaria, Loscalzo J, Fauci A, Kasper D, Hauser S, Longo D, Jameson J. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e; 2022. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=265435854&bookid=3095&Resultclick=2 Accessed: March 24, 2024
Copyright © 2024 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 12 ---
• Sporozoites rapidly invade liver parenchymal
cells and begin asexual reproduction →
exoerythrocytic stage schizonts
• The schizonts rupture releasing numerous
merozoites (asexual progeny) that enter the
bloodstream, and invade red cells, and
become trophozoites (ring stage). Some
mature into schizonts.
By the end of the erythrocytic stage, the
parasite has consumed 2/3 of the RBC’s
hemoglobin and occupies most of the cell.
• The schizonts rupture, releasing 6-30
merozoites which can invade more RBCs,
repeating the cycle.
• Some merozoites differentiate into male and
female gametocytes.
Only the asexual erythrocytic stage causes
clinical malaria.
Life cycle of malaria parasites. Only the asexual erythrocytic stage of infection causes clinical malaria. All effective
antimalarial treatments are blood schizonticides that kill this stage. (CDC/Alexander J. da Silva, PhD; Melanie Moser.) Slide adapted by LG
Citation: Chapter 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs, Vanderah TW. Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16<sup>th</sup> Edition; 2024, figure 52-1.
Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755910 Accessed: March 25, 2024
12
Copyright © 2024 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Clinical Features of P. falciparum Malaria
Presentation can vary substantially depending on the infecting species,
the level of parasitemia, the immune status of the patient, and age.
Signs and Uncomplicated:
Symptoms fever, malaise, mild anemia, palpable spleen in some cases
Complications Severe falciparum malaria: Can be fatal
of malaria
hyperparasitemia hypotension/shock acidosis
hemolysis hypoglycemia pulmonary
severe anemia acute kidney injury edema/ARDS;
seizures coma
Lab Intra-erythrocytic parasites identified in Giemsa-stained thick
and thin blood smears
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
https://encrypted-tbn3.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcRMCk6IKxwrXLzPgoFHr6HG7LjJvXweGztnZdGCimOgvOKDMSHG
High-power view of a normal peripheral blood smear.
Several platelets (arrows) and a normal lymphocyte
(arrowhead) can also be seen. The red cells are of
relatively uniform size and shape. The diameter of the
Bursting Plasmodium-infected red blood cell
normal red cell should approximate that of the nucleus of
the small lymphocyte; central pallor (dashed arrow) should
https://www.homelandsecuritynewswire.com/promise-vaccine-against-deadly-malaria-parasite
equal one-third of its diameter.
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Harrison’s updated figure 219-6
Thick blood films of Plasmodium falciparum. A. Trophozoites. B. Gametocytes. (Reproduced from Bench Aids
for the Diagnosis of Malaria Infections, 2nd ed, with the permission of the World Health Organization.)
Citation: Malaria, Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Loscalzo J. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 20e; 2018. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=192280354&bookid=2129&Resultclick=2 Accessed: April 19, 2020
15
Copyright © 2020 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Harrison’s updated figure 219-4
Thin blood films of Plasmodium falciparum. A. Young trophozoite. B. Old trophozoite. C. Trophozoites in erythrocytes and
pigment in polymorphonuclear cells. D. Mature schizont. E. Female gametocyte. F. Male gametocyte. (Reproduced from
Bench Aids for the Diagnosis of Malaria Infections, 2nd ed, with the permission of the World Health Organization.)
Citation: Malaria, Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Loscalzo J. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 20e; 2018. Available at:
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=192280354&bookid=2129&Resultclick=2 Accessed: April 19, 2020
16
Copyright © 2020 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Chemoprophylaxis and Chemotherapy of Malarial Infections
Goals
1. Prevention of malaria in nonimmune travelers
2. Prevention of malaria and its complications in endemic regions in populations at high risk for
severe disease, such as infants, children, and pregnant persons
3. Treatment of uncomplicated malaria
4. Treatment of severe malaria
Chemoprophylaxis:
• The antimalarial drugs can prevent the development of symptomatic malaria caused by the
asexual erythrocytic forms.
Treatment:
• Artemisinins in combination with a long-acting agent (ACT) are preferred for treatment.
• Chloroquine for chloroquine-sensitive malaria (or ACT).
• No one agent is effective against both latent hepatic and erythrocytic stages of P. vivax and P.
ovale.
• A schizonticide plus primaquine or tafenoquine are required to effect radical cure (prevention of
relapse).
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Antimalarial drugs
Malaria Prophylaxis and Treatment Malaria Treatment
Long-acting oral drugs: Short-acting drugs:
•  Chloroquine •  Arteminisin
•  Mefloquine •  Artemether
•  Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) •  Artesunate (parenteral only)
•  Lumefantrine • Dihydroartemisinin (not available in U.S.)
Only in fixed combination with artemisinin •  Quinine
Shorter-acting oral drugs
Slow-acting antimalarial drugs:
(more frequent dosing)
•  Doxycycline
•  Atovaquone-progruanil
•  Clindamycin
•  Doxycycline
Long-acting antimalarials not available in the U.S.
Amodiaquine
Piperaquine
Pyonardine tetraphosphate
Quinine I.V.
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
CATEGORIES OF ANTIMALARIAL AGENTS
EFFECT OF DRUG ON PARASITE VIABILITY
LIVER STAGES BLOOD STAGES
GROUP DRUGS SPOROZOITE PRIMARY HYPNOZOITE ASEXUAL GAMETOCYTE
1 Artemisinins – – – + +
Chloroquine – – – + +/–
Mefloquine – – – + –
Quinine/Quinidine – – – + +/–
Pyrimethamine – – – + –
Sulfadoxine – – – + –
Tetracycline – – – + –
2 Atovaquone –
– + – + +/–
Proguanil (combo)
3 Primaquine – + + – +
Tafenoquine + + + + +
+/−: not reliably effective at eliminating gametocytes
19
Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 14e, 2023; Table 66-1
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Chemoprophylaxis in malaria endemic regions
Use in C-resistant C-sensitive
drug frequency start stop P. vivax
pregnancy P. Falciparum P. Falciparum
Chloroquine once weekly 1-2 weeks 4 weeks
yes ✓ ✓
A-P once daily 1-2 days 7 days
no ✓ ✓ ✓
Mefloquine once weekly 2-3 weeks 4 weeks
yes ✓ ✓ ✓
Doxycycline once daily 1-2 days 4 weeks
no ✓ ✓ ✓
Tafenoquine once weekly see below see below
no ✓ ✓ ✓
Primaquine once daily 1-2 days 7 days
no ✓
A-P: Atovaquone-proguanil C: Chloroquine
Tafenoquine: A loading dose is taken 3 days before exposure, then once weekly starting 7 days after the loading dose.
Tafenoquine is approved for prophylaxis in people ≥18 years old and ≥16 years old to prevent relapse of P. vivax.
Primaquine: Appropriate for short-duration travel to areas with principally P. vivax.
Primaquine once daily for 14 days is also to prevent relapse from presumptive P. vivax or P. ovale.
Pediatrics: Chloroquine, atovaquone-proguanil, mefloquine, doxycycline (≥8 years old), and primaquine may be used.
20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Malaria Treatment (nonpregnant adults and pediatric patients) General guidelines (WHO 2022)
TAKEAWAYS: 1) Artemisinin combination therapy (ACT) is preferred. 2) Why: Rapid-acting and
short-acting artemisinin is combined with long-acting drug. 3) Monitor parasite density.
Uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria
Artemether-lumefantrine orally, twice daily x3 days with Patients >65 kg: consider an alternative agent
full meal or milk Efficacy diminishes with increasing body weight.
Combinations available outside the U.S.; all are given orally once daily for 3 days.
Artesunate-amodiaquine, artesunate-mefloquine, artesunate with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, dihydroartemisinin-
piperaquine, and artesunate pyonardine tetraphosphate
Severe P. falciparum malaria with no established artermisinin resistance
Preferred Alternatives if artesunate is unavailable
Artesunate IV or IM In United States: Outside U.S.:
at 0,12, and 24 hours then Orally or via nasogastric 1) Artemether IM until artesunate is available or oral
1x daily until parasite tube until artesunate is treatment can be given, or
density <1%, then oral ACT available 2) Quinine IV until artesunate arrives
Severe P. falciparum malaria with established artemisinin resistance
Artesunate IV or IM In United States: Outside U.S.:
at 0,12, and 24 hours then Orally or via nasogastric 1) Artemether IM until artesunate available or oral tolerated
1x daily until parasite tube until artesunate is plus
21
density <1%, then oral ACT available 2) Quinine IV until artesunate arrives
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Pregnant Persons and Children: Chemoprophylaxis and Treatment
Chemoprophylaxis for pregnant people
Travelers ➢ Defer travel if possible. Pregnant people are at risk for severe malaria.
• Chloroquine or Mefloquine
Endemic areas Intermittent preventive treatment (IPTp) for all pregnant people
➢ SP: 4 doses ~1 month apart from 13 weeks (early 2nd trimester) until 38 weeks
Treatment of pregnant people
Severe malaria ➢ Artesunate IV or IM; switch to oral ACT when tolerated
Uncomplicated • Artemisinin-lumefantrine all trimesters or other ACTs if A-L is unavailable.
chloroquine- • 2nd/3rd trimesters: any ACT
resistant malaria • Quinine or clindamycin therapy are alternatives (all trimesters).
Chemoprophylaxis for children at high risk of severe malaria (endemic areas): Intermittent
curative doses of antimalarial therapy, regardless of whether the child is infected, to kill existing
parasites and prevent new infection. WHO recommendation: SP plus amodiaquine (SP + AQ).
Seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) Perennial malaria chemoprevention (PMC)
Intermittent dosing during peak malaria Intermittent dosing at predefined intervals.
transmission seasons
22
WHO malaria guidelines, 30 Nov 2024
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Two WHO-approved Malaria vaccines: RTS,S/AS01 (Mosquirix) and R21/Matrix-M
Recombinant Plasmodium falciparum: circumsporozoite protein (CSP) central repeat region
The WHO recommends a 4-dose schedule for the prevention of P. falciparum malaria for children
living in regions with moderate to high malaria transmission starting at 5 months of age:
3 doses at monthly intervals followed by a fourth dose to maintain efficacy
RTS,S/AS01: fourth dose 18 months after the third dose
R21/Matrix-M: fourth dose 12 months after the third dose
• Highly efficacious when given before high transmission season
• Safety demonstrated in clinical trials. Safety monitoring is continuing.
• Expected to have high public health impact when implemented broadly; 28 African countries plan
to introduce WHO-recommended malaria vaccine as part of their national immunization
programs.
• Cost effective (a few $US per dose), comparable to other malaria interventions and childhood
vaccines.
Circumsporozoite protein is a multifunctional protein required for sporozoite development.
https://www.who.int/news/item/02-10-2023-who-recommends-r21-matrix-m-vaccine-for-malaria-prevention-in-updated-advice-on-immunization 23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Chloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine
Chloroquine
(weak bases)
(4-aminoquinoline)
Blood schizonticide
Prophylaxis and treatment of chloroquine-sensitive malaria, erythrocytic stage.
May be used in pregnancy.
Worldwide chloroquine resistance.
Chloroquine-sensitive regions are Central America west of Panama Canal; the
Dominican Republic; Haiti (resistance reported); and parts of the Middle East.
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Chloroquine Pharmacology
PK Oral (safest route) very large Vd → loading dose (treatment)
CYP3A4 metab.urine, unchanged and metabs.
Sequestered in liver, spleen, kidney, lung, brain, spinal cord, melanocytes
t½ 3-5 days; t½ 1-2 months
initial terminal
Prophylaxis Treatment:
500 mg weekly x2 weeks prior to 1000 mg, then 500 mg 6, 24, and 48 hours after
exposure first dose
Continue weekly and x4 weeks after Note: High dose – 2.5 g in 48 hours
exposure
MOA Enters food vacuole of parasite → disrupts heme sequestration → oxidative damage to
membrane and critical biomolecules (next slide)
Resistance 1) P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter, PfCRT is expressed on the
membrane of the food vacuole. K76T point mutation in PfCRT gene → accumulation
of drug in the parasites’ food vacuoles
➢ K76T mutation is strongly associated with clinical treatment failure and is a molecular
marker for surveillance of chloroquine resistance.
2) P-glycoprotein transporter (gene pfmdr1); pfmrp and other transporter gene mutations
25
may also be involved in resistance to quinolines
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Possible action of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
on the formation of hemozoin in Plasmodium species
• Chloroquine and other quinolines concentrate in the highly acidic
digestive vacuoles of susceptible Plasmodium
• Binds to heme → disrupt heme sequestration → failure to inactivate
heme or enhanced toxicity of drug-heme complexes → oxidative damage
to membranes, digestive proteases, or other critical biomolecules
Lippincott Illustrated Reviews 8e, 2023 Figure 35.7 26
https://books.byui.edu/bio_381_pathophysiol/321__hemoglobin_and_
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Chloroquine Adverse Effects
Low prophylactic Generally well tolerated at prophylactic doses
dose
GI irritation (take with food to decrease GI effects), rash, headaches
High treatment  risk of side effects
dose
Pruritis; diarrhea, nausea, vomiting; headache, visual disturbances; rash, photosensitivity
Acute toxicity Too rapid IV infusion: narrow safety margin (a single 30mg/kg or >5g dose usually fatal)
The IV formulation is not available in the U.S.
Long-term use High cumulative doses
(for treatment of Cardiovascular – arrhythmia, AV block, ECG changes; skin – blue-gray pigmentation,
autoimmune dermatitis, phototoxicity, rash, severe skin reactions; severe hypoglycemia; potentially
disorders) irreversible ototoxicity, retinopathy, myopathy and peripheral neuropathy; agitation, anxiety,
confusion, other neuropsychiatric effects
Interactions Antacids, kaolin-pectin antidiarrheals →  absorption CYP3A4 inducers and inhibitors
(not a complete list)
Drug combos QT interval prolongation
that could cause: Concurrent use of drugs with the same toxicities increase the risk
27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Mefloquine
four stereoisomers with similar
antimalarial potency but different
pharmacokinetic profiles
Blood schizonticide
Prophylaxis and treatment of chloroquine-resistant malaria, erythrocytic stage.
May be used in pregnancy.
28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Mefloquine PK, Actions, and Resistance
PK Well absorbed, enhanced by food; widely distributed; CYP3A4, inactive metabolites
excreted in bile/feces; t½ 2-4 weeks (adults)
terminal
Prevention: 250 mg once weekly Treatment: 750 mg, then 500 mg 6 and 12 h later
MOA unknown
Resistance Associated with amplification of pfmdr1  High level resistance in Mainland Southeast Asia
Neuropsychiatric effects: • Seizure disorder: Mefloquine use increases risk of
• Anxiety, depression, confusion may be a seizures. Mefloquine is contraindicated.
prodrome to more serious effects, such as • Cardiac disease: Mefloquine causes ECG changes.
paranoia, hallucinations, psychosis Use with caution.
• Dizziness or vertigo, loss of balance can occur • Heme: Agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia reported.
• Prophylactic use: If symptoms occur, • Liver: Mefloquine elimination may be prolonged in
discontinue mefloquine and use alternative. patients with hepatic disease.
• Caution in activities requiring mental alertness • Derm: Severe skin reactions
(drivers, pilots, machinery operators, others) • Hypersensitivity reactions
Mefloquine should not be prescribed for And other adverse effects
patients with major psychiatric disorders.
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Atovaquone
Atovaquone-Proguanil [Malarone]
Fixed-combination tablet
(atovaquone 250 mg, proguanil HCl 100 mg)
Blood schizonticide
Prophylaxis and treatment of chloroquine-resistant malaria,
erythrocytic stage.
Atovaquone and proguanil act synergistically.
Atovaquone is highly active against erythrocytic- and primary
hepatic-stage but not against hypnozoites of P. vivax and P. ovale.
Proguanil is a biguanide
Not for use in pregnancy due to lack of safety data. that is converted to
active cycloguanil.
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Atovaquone-Proguanil Pharmacology
PK Atovaquone: oral; >99% protein Proguanil (prodrug): oral; hepatic CYP2C19 to
bound; not significantly metabolized; active cycloguanil, urine excretion of proguanil and
biliary/fecal excretion of unchanged cycloguanil; t½ 12-20 hours
drug; t½ 3 days
Slow, erratic absorption and low bioavailability (take with fatty food)
MOA Collapse of the parasite mitochondrial Cycloguanil inhibits the bifunctional dihydrofolate
membrane potential (next slide) reductase–thymidylate synthetase
Proguanil itself contributes to the collapse of the parasite mitochondrial membrane potential
Resistance: Point mutations in cytochrome b gene within the cytochrome bc1 complex
Resistance is not widespread.
AEs Generally well tolerated: Side effects include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting (taking the
drug with food may reduce GI effects); headache, dizziness; elevated serum transaminases
(reversible), hepatitis reported
DDIs CYP2C19 inhibitors may reduce cycloguanil levels
Other drug-drug interactions (mechanisms unknown); check literature prior to prescribing
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Atovaquone binds cytochrome bc complex
1
Cytochrome
bc1 complex
Atovaquone binds cytochrome bc complex on inner membrane of mitochondria
1
Inhibits electron transport → collapses the parasite mitochondrial membrane potential.
Cycloguanil (active metabolite of proguanil) selectively inhibits the bifunctional dihydrofolate
reductase–thymidylate synthetase of sensitive plasmodia → inhibits nucleotide, DNA and RNA synthesis
Proguanil (parent drug) accentuates mitochondrial membrane-potential-collapsing action of
32
ahttotpv:/a/wqwuown.uep taogdaaitnes.cto Pm. /fcaolcntipenatrsu/imm abguets i/tN dEisUpRlaOy/8s2 n7o1 5s/uRcehs paircattiovrityy- cbhya iints-eedlfit..jpg?title=Respiratory+chain
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Sulfadoxine and Pyrimethamine (SP)
Available only in a fixed-dose tablet [Fansidar]
• No longer recommended for travelers for prophylaxis or treatment of
P. falciparum malaria due to widespread resistance.
• The product has been discontinued in the U.S.
Blood schizonticide
• Sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine act synergistically to inhibit folate synthesis.
• The long half-lives of the drugs prolongs exposure, which allows selection of
resistant organisms. Additionally, repeated exposure to SP in malaria endemic
regions contributes to resistance.
• Avoid in pregnancy first trimester due to pryimethamine adverse events observed
in animal reproduction studies.
• WHO recommends SP for intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy for
pregnant patients without HIV who live in areas of high malaria transmission
starting at 13 weeks .
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Sulfadoxine and Pyrimethamine Pharmacology
PK Sulfadoxine: oral, slowly absorbed; Pyrimethamine: oral; well absorbed;
~90% protein bound; ~90% protein bound;
metabolism by N-acetylation; hepatic metabolism;
urine >90% unchanged drug; urine, ~25% unchanged drug;
t½ 8 days t½ ~4 days
MOA Sulfadoxine inhibits dihydropteroate Pyrimethamine inhibits dihydrofolate
synthase (DHPS) reductase (DHFR)
Pyrimethamine
Resistance: Resistance:
Point mutations in Pf-DHPS gene Point mutations in Pf-DHFR genes
reduces drug binding. reduces drug binding.
AEs Potentially severe skin rashes: High doses can cause megaloblastic
erythema multiforme, anemia, leukopenia,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, thrombocytopenia.
toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug Caution in patients with folate
Katzung Basic & Clinical Pharmacology
reaction with eosinophilia and deficiency, hepatic or renal
14e, 2018 Figure 46-2
systemic symptoms (DRESS) impairment, history of seizure
(sulfonamides class effect) disorder. Probably safe in G6PD
34
deficiency at therapeutic doses.
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Lumefantrine
Only used in fixed-combination with artemether [Coartem]
35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Lumefantrine Pharmacology
PK Oral with high fat meal (16-fold increase in absorption)
Highly protein bound; CYP3A4, inactive metabolite; t½ 3-6 days
MOA Unknown. Laboratory assay data suggests it decreases hemazoin formation.
Activity Blood schizonticide
Use Fixed combination tablet: artemether and lumefantrine = Coartem
Treatment of uncomplicated malaria; 3-day course
AE Well tolerated; mild QT interval prolongation
Cautions – ECG monitoring may be advised in the following conditions:
• Patients with long QT syndrome or symptomatic arrhythmias
• Administered with other drugs that can prolong the QT interval
• Concomitant use of CYP3A4 inhibitors
• Concomitant use of CYP3A4 inducers is contraindicated →  efficacy
36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Short-acting blood schizonticides
for the treatment of P. falciparum and non-falciparum malaria
Short-acting antimalarials are always used with a long-acting antimalarial drug.
Artemisinin derivatives
Quinine
37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Artemisinin derivatives
• 
Artemether
• 
Artesunate
Artemisia annua - Qinghao
• Artemisinin
• Dihydroartemisinin
endoperoxide
Artemisinin combination therapy (ACT): bridge
Several fixed-dose products of artemisinin with a
long-acting antimalarial are available.
Products available in the US:
Artemether-lumefantrine [Coartem]
Artesunate
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Artemisinins Class Pharmacokinetics (US products)
Artemether Artesunate (prodrug)
A Oral with high fat meal IM, IV, (rectal in some countries)
(2-3-fold increase in absorption) prodrug of DHA
D Highly protein bound Highly protein bound
Widely distributed Widely distributed
M Hepatic metabolism (CYP3A4 mainly) Artesunate → plasma esterases → DHA
to dihydroartemisinin (DHA) active metabolite • DHA → glucuronide metabolite, inactive
E Urine as inactive metabolites Urine, DHA glucuronide metabolite
t½ ~2 h  Tmax ~2 h DHA 1.3 h
Recall: Coartem: Artesunate is used for the
Artemether is combined with lumefantrine. treatment of severe malaria.
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Artemisinin partial resistance to
P. falciparum is emerging in Greater
Artemisinins Activity
Mekong Subregion, Papua New
Guinea, South America, and
Proposed mechanism of action:
Eastern Africa.
1. Artemisinin binds to free heme in the
Mechanism undefined
food vacuole released after digestion of hemoglobin by the parasite.
Possible mechanism
2. The drug interacts with the heme iron forming covalent complexes,
possibly disrupting heme detoxification and increasing oxidative stress.
• Point mutations in the PFkelch
3. Oxidative stress causes structural damage and inhibition of nucleic acid BTB/POZ propeller domain
and protein synthesis.
(PFk13) are associated with
4. The endoperoxide bridge is essential for activity.
delayed parasite clearance.
Activity
• Down-regulation of metabolic
• Active against asexual erythrocytic stages of chloroquine-sensitive
activity in ring stages →…→
and chloroquine-resistance, all plasmodia spp
reduced activation and
• Gametocidal activity
conversion of artemisinin drugs
• No activity against primary or latent liver stages
to reactive intermediates
• Nonplasmodial activity:
Antiparasitic activity demonstrated against Leishmania major, • Therapy may be extended from
Toxoplasma gondii and Schistosoma species 3 days to 6 days and follow with
daily smears until negative.
Figure right: Propeller mutations in propeller blades of K13 Kelch protein (orange spheres)
40
https://www.nature.com/articles/nature12845
--- SLIDE 41 ---
ACT Treatment of Malaria
WHO recommendations:
• Artemisinins should be used only in combination with longer-acting antimalarials to deter
emergence of resistance and prevent recrudescence.
• ACT: First-line treatment of severe malaria and uncomplicated malaria in all populations
Artemether-Lumefantrine 80 mg/480 mg tabs (4 tablets) 2x daily for 3 days
Uncomplicated
Weight-based dosing for infants and children
malaria
First 2 doses 8 hours apart, ideally
Artesunate I.V. bolus or I.M. x 4 doses (0,12, 24, and 48 hours) then 1x daily
Severe malaria − Treat until parasitemia <1%; complete course orally when tolerated by patient
− Oral therapy must begin ≤4 hours after the last dose of I.V. artesunate.
Reduce In low transmission regions,
gametocyte a single dose of primaquine on Day 1 of treatment along with ACT
transmission (except pregnant people and breastfeeding infants <6 months old)
WHO Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria, 30 November 2024
41
https://www.who.int/teams/global-malaria-programme/guidelines-for-malaria
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Artemisinins Side Effects
• Generally well tolerated
• Most common: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and dizziness
• Hematologic: Dose-related reversible neutropenia, anemia, and acute hemolysis
• Hepatic: transient increases in serum transaminases
• Blackwater fever:
Artesunate I.V. in the treatment of severe malaria
➢ Bursting red blood cells release hemoglobin into the bloodstream and urine, which
turns dark red or black. Kidney failure can result.
➢ Delayed-onset (may occur 1-3 weeks after therapy)
➢ May be severe (reported in up to 10% of travelers)
➢ Higher likelihood with higher parasite density
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Quinine sulfate
A weak base
Blood schizonticide
Mechanism is unknown.
Short-acting drug for the treatment of chloroquine-resistant
malaria, erythrocytic stage.
May be used in pregnancy but not preferred. Quinine can cause
recurrent hypoglycemia. Pregnant patients are especially Quinine is obtained from the
bark of the cinchona tree.
susceptible to hypoglycemia.
(native to South America)
Quinidine is more potent stereoisomer of quinine developed for the treatment of arrhythmias.
Quinidine I.V. was used in the past for the treatment of severe malaria.
43
Quinidine is cardiotoxic and manufacture of the IV form of the drug has been discontinued.
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Quinine Pharmacokinetics and Therapeutic Uses
A Oral; readily absorbed Tmax 3-8 Therapeutic use:
(IV formulation not available in US) uncomplicated P. falciparum-resistant malaria
• an alternative to ACT
• Quinine is also effective for non-falciparum
D • α1-acid glycoprotein binding ~70-95% malaria.
➢ increased 1-acid glycoprotein levels in severe disease
• Coadministered with long-acting antimalarial
P-glycoprotein inhibitor
agent:
Doxycycline or
M CYP3A4 mainly; forms a less active metabolite
Tetracycline or
Bioavailability ~85%
Clindamycin (young children / pregnancy)
Dosing, adults: (CDC recommendations)
E Urine ~20% unchanged drug • 2 caps (648 mg) 3x daily for 3 days
• Severe long-term renal impairment: adjust dosage • or 7 days if infection was acquired in Southeast
Asia
FYI:
t½ Healthy adults ~11h; ~18 h severe malaria Babesiosis, a protozoan parasite transmitted by
• Shorter in healthy children deer ticks: Treatment 7 to 10 days
• quinine and clindamycin (alternative)
• ~18 h in elderly individual
• atovaquone and azithromycin (preferred)
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Quinine Toxicities
Cinchonism Mild cinchonism: occurs with therapeutic doses
(from cinchona) • Tinnitus, headache, vasodilation, sweating, nausea, dizziness; visual disturbance
Severe cinchonism: marked effects after prolonged therapy
(quinine should be discontinued)
Hypoglycemia Can occur at therapeutic doses. Hypoglycemia is especially dangerous in patients with severe
malaria and pregnant patients, who have increased sensitivity to insulin. Combined effects of:
⎯ quinine, increased consumption of glucose by host and parasites, failure of hepatic gluconeogenesis ⎯
Hypotension Severe with rapid IV infusion of quinine or quinidine
Blackwater fever Malarial hemolytic anemia with quinine treatment
• Massive intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, anuria, renal failure, death
Thrombocytopenia Drug-induced immune-mediated reaction
• Life-threatening hemolytic uremic syndrome / thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (HUS/TTP)
Hypersensitivity Skin rashes, urticaria, angioedema
reactions
IV Administration Quinine, like quinidine, is cardiotoxic when administered IV.
QTc interval prolongation→ risk of ventricular arrhythmia (torsades de pointes)
Pregnancy Quinine appears to be safe in pregnancy
➢ Glucose levels must be monitored because of the increased risk of hypoglycemia. 45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Potentially serious quinine-related drug-drug interactions
Drugs with similar • QT interval prolongation: lumefantrine, antiarrhythmics, macrolide
toxicities antibiotics, azole antifungal agents, and many more
Metabolism-related CYP3A4 inducers and inhibitors can affect quinine levels.
Transport-related P-glycoprotein inhibition by quinine can affect levels of P-gp substrates.
• digoxin, cyclosporine, many cancer drugs, and many many more
Warfarin Quinine may enhance the anticoagulant effects
Neuromuscular Enhance neuromuscular block (avoid combination)
blockers The mechanism is not understood.
Antacids May decrease serum concentration of quinine. Avoid
and many more
46
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Tissue schizonticides
for the prevention and treatment of latent liver stages
Primaquine
Tafenoquine
8-aminoquinoline Primaquine
Tafenoquine
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Primaquine and Tafenoquine Pharmacokinetics
Primaquine Tafenoquine
A Oral, well absorbed Oral,
T 1-3 hours absorption increased with high fat meal
max
T 12-15 hours
max
D Widely distributed to tissues Protein binding >99%
V 1600-2470 L
d
M Hepatic, CYP1A2 to active metabolite Not available
Carboxyprimaquine (not a substrate of CYP450 enzymes or phase 2
also a substrate of CYP2D6, 3A4 enzymes)
E Urine, metabolites Not available
t½ 7 hours (range ~4-10 hours) 15 days
Mechanism of action: Unknown
48
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Primaquine and Tafenoquine Actions and Uses
G6PD testing prior to therapy is required. Dosing recommendations are for adults with normal G6PD levels
Liver stages: Gametocidal
Active against the hepatic stages of all human malaria In low transmission areas,
parasites ➢ A single dose of primaquine following ACT reduces
including the dormant hypnozoite stages of P. falciparum gametocyte carriage and
P. vivax and P. ovale transmission and is believed to be safe in people
with G6PD deficiency.
Standard therapy (radical cure) of P. vivax and P. ovale malaria
• Chloroquine (or hydroxychloroquine) is administered to eradicate erythrocytic forms
Primaquine has only modest activity against asexual erythrocytic stages.
Tafenoquine has substantial activity against asexual erythrocytic stages but is not indicated for acute infection.
• Primaquine (infants, children, adolescents, adults): 30 mg once daily for 14 days
• Tafenoquine (≥16 years of age): 200 mg single dose on day 1 or 2 of chloroquine therapy
Terminal prophylaxis after departure from malarious region to reduce the likelihood of relapse:
• Primaquine: 30 mg once daily for 14 days
• Tafenoquine: 200 mg single dose 7 days after completion of maintenance regimen
Chemoprophylaxis while in endemic areas
• Primaquine: Once daily beginning 1-2 days before travel and continuing for 7 days after return
• Tafenoquine: Loading dose followed by once weekly for up to 6 months (people ≥18 years of age)
49
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Primaquine and Tafenoquine hemolytic anemia related to G6PD deficiency
G6PD deficiency →
Hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia (NADPH
deficiency)
• >200 million people worldwide, ~11% of African
Americans
Test for G6PD deficiency before PQ or TQ
administration:
• PQ: Full dose for people with G6PD activity ≥70%;
modified dosing for people with 30-70% G6PD
activity
• TQ: Use only in patients with ≥70% G6PD activity.
Contraindications:
• Acutely ill patients predisposed to granulocytopenia
(RA, SLE)
• Other potentially hemolytic drugs
• PREGNANCY Risk of fetal hemolysis if the fetus has
G6PD deficiency.
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Mechanism Hemolysis
Inherited disorder
Genetic defect in the red blood cell enzyme G6PD
G6PD generates NADPH and protects RBCs from oxidative injury
Oxidant injury → hemolysis
Severity determined by the drug, the degree of enzyme deficiency, and
other factors (eg infection) 51
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e, 2023 Figure 35.6
--- SLIDE 52 ---
Antibiotics with antimalarial activity
Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Clindamycin
52
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Doxycycline and Clindamycin Actions
Antimalarial activity:
• Blood stage: Slow-acting schizonticides
• Liver stage: Do NOT eliminate liver stage infection
Mechanism: Delayed death mechanism
Specifically impair expression of the apicoplast gene → abnormal cell division → death of the
progeny of the drug-treated Plasmodium parasites.
Thus, onset of antimalarial activity is delayed.
Dahl EL, et al, 2006; Ramya TNC, et al, 2007; Dahl EJ, et al, 2007
Doxycycline or tetracycline:
• Prophylaxis: Short-term prophylaxis in chloroquine-resistant areas
• Treatment: Adjunct to quinine or artesunate for uncomplicated or severe malaria
Clindamycin: treatment alternative to doxycycline in children <8 y.o. and pregnant people
 Doxycycline, tetracycline, and clindamycin are not effective as single agents in
the treatment of acute malaria due to their slow action.
53
--- SLIDE 54 ---
Doxycycline and Clindamycin Common Adverse Effects
Doxycycline and tetracycline: Tetracyclines are contraindicated in children
<8 years old and pregnant people.
GI upset; yeast infections; photosensitivity
Tetracyclines cross the placenta and
accumulate in long tubular bones and
Clindamycin:
developing teeth, causing permanent
Diarrhea and skin rash, particularly in HIV-
discoloration.
infected patients
Pseudomembranous colitis caused by a
FYI: Doxycycline has not been found to cause tooth
toxin released from Clostridium difficile can
staining in pediatric patients treated for rickettsial disease
occur when used for 21 days. Doxycycline is the most effective
treatment for rickettsial disease.
54
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Check your knowledge
1. Suzie is a 22-year-old healthy woman planning a 2-week mission trip to West Africa with her
church group. NKDA. She is provided with medication to prevent malaria and directed to start
taking it once daily with a fatty food two days before traveling, continue for the duration of her
stay, and for seven days after her return. She packs lightweight long-sleeved shirts and long
pants, DEET-based bug spray, and insecticide treated bed nets. What is the mechanism of the
drug that was prescribed? Why should the drug be taken with a fatty food?
• Atovaquone-proguanil
• Atovaquone binds cytochrome bc complex on inner membrane of mitochondria, which
1
inhibits electron transport, which leads to the collapse of the parasite mitochondrial
membrane potential.
• Cycloguanil (active metabolite of proguanil) selectively inhibits the bifunctional dihydrofolate
reductase–thymidylate synthetase of sensitive plasmodia.
• Proguanil (parent drug) accentuates mitochondrial membrane-potential-collapsing
action of atovaquone against P. falciparum but it displays no such activity by itself.
• Atovaquone-proguanil should be taken with a fatty food to improve absorption and may help
relieve the GI side effects – abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting.
55
--- SLIDE 56 ---
Check your knowledge
2. Andy is a 50-year-old male being sent by his company to Central Africa to oversee a new division.
He has a history of major depression managed with meditation, exercise, diet, and country line
dancing. NKDA. Which antimalarial prophylaxis medication should be avoided for Andy and why?
• Chloroquine: Sub-Saharan Africa is a region with widespread chloroquine-resistant P.
falciparum.
• Mefloquine: Neuropsychiatric effects – anxiety, depression, confusion, which may be a prodrome
to more serious effects, such as paranoia, hallucinations, psychosis. Mefloquine is not
recommended for patients with a history of major psychiatric disorders.
• Mefloquine can also cause dizziness or vertigo, loss of balance and should be used with caution
in activities requiring mental alertness (drivers, pilots, machinery operators, others).
• Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is not recommended due to worldwide resistance and it is not
available in the U.S.
• All short-acting drugs – artemisinins, quinine – are not used for prophylaxis. Because of their
short half-lives, they do not provide adequate protection against infection of the red blood cells
by the parasites.
3. What antimalarial drugs would be appropriate for Andy?
• Atovaquone-proguanil or
• Doxycycline
56
--- SLIDE 57 ---
Check your knowledge
4. JP is 38 years old and planning a 10-day trip to Asia where the predominant malarial parasite is
P. vivax. JP is healthy with no medical conditions. NKDA. A prescription is provided for an
antimalarial drug for prophylaxis of parasitic infection of the red cells. What is the drug? What are
the directions for taking it? Why?
• Chloroquine is recommended for prophylaxis and treatment of non-falciparum malaria.
• Chloroquine is taken 1 to 2 weeks before traveling, then weekly during the duration of the stay,
then for 4 weeks after returning.
• Chloroquine has an initial half-life of 3-5 days and a terminal half-life of 1-2 months. Chloroquine
is sequestered in tissues: liver, spleen, kidney, lung, brain, spinal cord, melanocytes.
5. When JP returns to the U.S., he is provided a prescription for a long-acting drug taken as a single
dose and directed to continue the antimalarial drug he was taking during his stay once weekly for
an additional four weeks. What is the purpose of the additional drug? What are two
contraindications to its use?
• Tafenoquine is prescribed to eradicate the P. vivax hypnozoites and prevent relapse.
• Tafenoquine is contraindicated in people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6P
deficiency (<70% or normal activity).
• G6PD screening must be performed before prescribing tafenoquine or primaquine.
• Tafenoquine is also not approved for pediatric patients (<18yo, prophylaxis; <16yo treatment.)
57
--- SLIDE 58 ---
Check your knowledge
6. AK is a 25-year-old woman invited to a family wedding in West Bengal in one month. She was
born in the U.S. and is pregnant at 23 weeks gestation (G1,P0). She states that she is excited to
see her family, whom she has not visited in ten years. For malaria prophylaxis, which of the
following is the best option for her?
A. Atovaquone-proguanil
B. Chloroquine
C. Mefloquine
D. Doxycycline
E. Do not travel to South Asia
• Option E: Don’t go
• Malaria infection in pregnancy is a major cause of maternal death, maternal anemia,
miscarriage, preterm birth, fetal growth restriction, low birth weight, stillbirth, congenital
infection, neonatal mortality.
• Pregnancy increases the chances of developing severe malaria and severe disease.
• P. falciparum infected red cells can sequester in the in the placenta and cause adverse
pregnancy outcome.
58
--- SLIDE 59 ---
Check your knowledge
7. Angelica is a previously healthy 4-year-old female who presents to the ED with fever and chills, rapid
heart rate, rapid breathing rate, headache, fatigue, nausea, diarrhea, and joint and muscle pains for 24
hours. Signs and symptoms of severe disease are absent. History is significant for recent travel to Haiti.
Physical exam and laboratory findings are consistent with P. falciparum infection. The patient is able to take
oral medication. Which of the following is the first-line therapy for this patient?
A. Artemisinin-lumefantrine
B. Artesunate
C. Chloroquine
D. Quinine-doxycycline
E. Primaquine
• Artemisinin-lumefantrine is the preferred drug. The tablets can be crushed and mixed in water if the
patient cannot swallow pills.
• Artesunate is given IV or IM for treatment of severe malaria until the patient can take oral meds.
• Chloroquine is also effective for sensitive Plasmodium infection. There are reports of chloroquine
resistance in Haiti.
• Quinine would be effective but is not preferred because it can cause hypoglycemia and blackwater fever
(intravascular hemolysis).
• Doxycycline is not given to patients <8 years old because it can cause discoloration of tooth enamel.
Clindamycin would be given instead.
• Primaquine is for eradication of P. vivax and P. ovale hypnozoites for “radical cure”.
59
--- SLIDE 60 ---
Summary
60
--- SLIDE 61 ---
Generally Accepted Mechanisms of Action of the Commonly Used Antimalarial Agents
Chloroquine Drug concentrates in the highly acidic digestive vacuoles of susceptible Plasmodium, where it binds
Hydroxychloroquine to heme and disrupts its sequestration as hemozoin
Mefloquine Unknown
Atovaquone Selective action on the mitochondrial cytochrome bc complex to inhibit electron transport and
1
collapse the mitochondrial membrane potential
Proguanil 1. Active metabolite selectively inhibits the bifunctional dihydrofolate reductase–thymidylate
synthetase
2. Parent compound accentuates the mitochondrial membrane-potential-collapsing action of
companion drug (proguanil)
Sulfadoxine Competitively inhibits PABA at Plasmodium dihydropteroate synthase
Pyrimethamine Potently inhibits Plasmodium dihydrofolate reductase
Lumefantrine Unknown
Artemisinin Artemisinins interact with the heme iron after hemoglobin digestion by parasite. Covalent
derivatives complexes form, possibly disrupting heme detoxification and increasing oxidative stress, which
causes structural damage and inhibition of nucleic acid and protein synthesis. The endoperoxide
bridge is essential for activity.
Quinine Unknown
Primaquine Unknown
61
Tafenoquine
--- SLIDE 62 ---
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS OF MALARIA
Drug therapy Chemoprophylactic use Comments
Chloroquine Use only in limited regions of chloroquine-sensitive P. Taken once weekly; can be used in all trimesters of pregnancy
falciparum, and for prophylaxis of P. vivax, P. ovale, and P.
malariae.
Mefloquine For prophylaxis of chloroquine-resistant, mefloquine-sensitive May be used in pregnancy
P. falciparum
Once weekly dose
Start 1-2 weeks before travelling to endemic region and
continue for 4 weeks after return
Mefloquine is not a good choice for individuals with major psychiatric conditions, seizure disorder, or cardiac conduction abnormalities.
Atovaquone- For chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum; start 1-2 days before Very well tolerated
proguanil entering an area where malaria transmission occurs and Avoid in pregnancy and children <5kg
continue for 7 days after leaving the region; taken daily Costly
Doxycycline Prophylaxis of chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum; take 1 day The least expensive antimalarial
Clindamycin: young before entering endemic area and continue for 4 weeks after Avoid in pregnancy and children <8 years old
children, pregnancy leaving the region; taken daily Doxycylcine causes photosensitivity and GI distress
Sulfodoxine- SP recommended for intermittent preventive treatment (IPT) in For infants and children at high risk of severe malaria in malaria-
Pyrimethamine pregnancy after 1st trimester: 4 doses ~28 days apart from 2nd endemic areas, seasonal and perennial malaria chemoprevention
trimester until 38 weeks (SMC / PMC) with SP plus amodiaquine
Primaquine For prophylaxis of P. vivax in travelers going to regions with G6PD deficiency testing required prior to use.
Tafenoquine >90% P. vivax; Contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding unless the infant
PQ: Once daily dose; Start 1-2 days prior to entering endemic has tested negative for G6PD deficiency
area and continue for 7 days after return May cause GI distress.
TQ: age ≥18yo; Loading dose 3 days before exposure, then
62
once weekly starting 7 days after the loading dose.
--- SLIDE 63 ---
Malaria Treatment Recommendations: 3-day regimens usually
Chloroquine or 48-hour treatment regimen for uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in chloroquine-sensitive areas
hydroxychloroquine only and for treatment of non-falciparum malaria by P. vivax / P. ovale / P. malariae / and P. knowlesi.
Artemisins Uncomplicated malaria: oral artemisinin combination with a long-acting agent
Artemether-lumefantrine in the US; lumfantrine t½ 72-144 hours; can cause mild QT prolongation
Treatment of severe malaria: artesunate IV/IM; switch to oral combination when appropriate
Mefloquine Available outside U.S as fixed-combination with atesunate or artemether for treatment of
uncomplicated malaria (2-day treatment regimen)
Atovaquone- Oral option for uncomplicated malaria and after treatment of severe malaria with artesunate.
proguanil
Quinine Quinine plus doxycycline (or clindamycin) alternative treatment of uncomplicated malaria
Quinine IV is available outside the U.S. for severe malaria with artesunate.
Primaquine Radical cure: Eradication of P. vivax and P. ovale hypnozoites in combination with schizonticide
(Primaquine daily x14 days; Tafenoquine single dose (long half-life)
Tafenoquine
Terminal prophylaxis: After departure from malaria region (PQ daily x14 days; TQ single dose)
Testing for G6PD deficiency prior to use is required.
63
--- SLIDE 64 ---
Village Life
www.articimo.com/africanart-paintings.htm64
--- SLIDE 65 ---
Check your knowledge
1. Suzie is a 22-year-old healthy woman planning a 2-week mission trip to West Africa with her
church group. NKDA. She is provided with medication to prevent malaria and directed to start
taking it with a fatty food once daily two days before traveling, continue for the duration of her
stay, and for seven days after her return. She packs lightweight long-sleeved shirts and long
pants, DEET-based bug spray, and insecticide treated bed nets. What is the mechanism of the
drug that was prescribed? Why should the drug be taken with a fatty food?
• Atovaquone-proguanil
• Atovaquone binds cytochrome bc complex on inner membrane of mitochondria, which
1
inhibits electron transport, which leads to the collapse of the parasite mitochondrial
membrane potential.
• Cycloguanil (active metabolite of proguanil) selectively inhibits the bifunctional dihydrofolate
reductase–thymidylate synthetase of sensitive plasmodia.
• Proguanil (parent drug) accentuates mitochondrial membrane-potential-collapsing
action of atovaquone against P. falciparum but it displays no such activity by itself.
• Atovaquone-proguanil should be taken with a fatty food to improve absorption and may help
relieve the GI side effects – abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting.
65
--- SLIDE 66 ---
Check your knowledge
2. Andy is a 50-year-old male being sent by his company to Central Africa to oversee a new division.
He has a history of major depression managed with meditation, exercise, diet, and country line
dancing. NKDA. Which antimalarial prophylaxis medication should be avoided for Andy and why?
• Chloroquine: Sub-Saharan Africa is a region with widespread chloroquine-resistant P.
falciparum.
• Mefloquine: Neuropsychiatric effects – anxiety, depression, confusion, which may be a prodrome
to more serious effects, such as paranoia, hallucinations, psychosis. Mefloquine is not
recommended for patients with a history of major psychiatric disorders.
• Mefloquine can also cause dizziness or vertigo, loss of balance and should be used with caution
in activities requiring mental alertness (drivers, pilots, machinery operators, others).
• Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is not recommended due to worldwide resistance and it is not
available in the U.S.
• All short-acting drugs – artemisinins, quinine – are not used for prophylaxis. Because of their
short half-lives, they do not provide adequate protection against infection of the red blood cells
by the parasites.
3. What antimalarial drugs would be appropriate for Andy?
• Atovaquone-proguanil or
• Doxycycline
66
--- SLIDE 67 ---
Check your knowledge
4. JP is 38 years old and planning a 10-day trip to Asia where the predominant malarial parasite is
P. vivax. JP is healthy with no medical conditions. NKDA. A prescription is provided for an
antimalarial drug for prophylaxis of parasitic infection of the red cells. What is the drug? What are
the directions for taking it? Why?
• Chloroquine is recommended for prophylaxis and treatment of non-falciparum malaria.
• Chloroquine is taken 1 to 2 weeks before traveling, then weekly during the duration of the stay,
then for 4 weeks after returning.
• Chloroquine has an initial half-life of 3-5 days and a terminal half-life of 1-2 months. Chloroquine
is sequestered in tissues: liver, spleen, kidney, lung, brain, spinal cord, melanocytes.
5. When JP returns to the U.S., he is provided a prescription for a long-acting drug taken as a single
dose and directed to continue the antimalarial drug he was taking during his stay once weekly for
an additional four weeks. What is the purpose of the additional drug? What are two
contraindications to its use?
• Tafenoquine is prescribed to eradicate the P. vivax hypnozoites and prevent relapse.
• Tafenoquine is contraindicated in people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6P
deficiency (<70% or normal activity).
• G6PD screening must be performed before prescribing tafenoquine or primaquine.
• Tafenoquine is also not approved for in pediatric patients (<18yo, prophylaxis; <16yo treatment.)
67
--- SLIDE 68 ---
Check your knowledge
6. AK is a 25-year-old woman invited to a family wedding in West Bengal in one month. She was
born in the U.S. and is pregnant at 23 weeks gestation (G1,P0). She states that she is excited to
see her family, whom she has not visited in ten years. For malaria prophylaxis, which of the
following is the best option for her?
A. Atovaquone-proguanil
B. Chloroquine
C. Mefloquine
D. Doxycycline
E. Do not travel to South Asia
• Option E: Don’t go
• Malaria infection in pregnancy is a major cause of maternal death, maternal anemia,
miscarriage, preterm birth, fetal growth restriction, low birth weight, stillbirth, congenital
infection, neonatal mortality.
• Pregnancy increases the chances of developing severe malaria and severe disease.
• P. falciparum infected red cells can sequester in the in the placenta and cause adverse
pregnancy outcome.
68
--- SLIDE 69 ---
Check your knowledge
7. Angelica is a previously healthy 4-year-old female presents to the ED with fever and chills, rapid heart
rate, rapid breathing rate, headache, fatigue, nausea, diarrhea, and joint and muscle pains for 24 hours.
Signs and symptoms of severe disease are absent. History is significant for recent travel to Haiti. Physical
exam and laboratory findings are consistent with P. falciparum infection. The patient is able to take oral
medication. Which of the following is the first-line therapy for this patient?
A. Artemisinin-lumefantrine
B. Artesunate
C. Chloroquine
D. Quinine-doxycycline
E. Primaquine
• Artemisinin-lumefantrine is the preferred drug. The tablets can be crushed and mixed in water if the
patient cannot swallow pills.
• Artesunate is given IV or IM for treatment of severe malaria until the patient can take oral meds.
• Chloroquine is an alternative for sensitive Plasmodium infection. There are reports of chloroquine
resistance in Haiti so ACT is a better option to be sure of effectiveness in curing malaria.
• Quinine would be effective but is not preferred because it can cause hypoglycemia and blackwater fever
(intravascular hemolysis hemoglobinuria).
• Doxycycline is not given to patients <8 years old because it can cause discoloration of tooth enamel.
Clindamycin would be given instead.
• Primaquine is for eradication of P. vivax and P. ovale hypnozoites for “radical cure”.
69
--- SLIDE 70 ---
References
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023; Chapter 66:
Chemotherapy of Malaria
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20e, 2018: Chapter 219: Malaria
• Access Medicine Jawetz, Melnick, and Adelberg’s Medical Microbiology 27e, 2016; Chapter 46: Medical
Parasitology
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 16e, 2024; Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal Drugs
• Access Medicine Sherris Medical Microbiology, 7e, 2018; Chapter 51: Apicomplexa and Microsporidia
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention > Parasites > Malaria https://cdc.gov/parasites/malaria/index.html
• Lexicomp monographs
• UpToDate various topics, literature reviews are current
• WHO Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria, 30 November 2024
https://www.who.int/teams/global-malaria-programme/guidelines-for-malaria
70
--- SLIDE 71 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R