SOURCE: Lecture # 173. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Chemotherapy of Antiprotozoal Agents
Amoebiasis Giardiasis Trichomoniasis Trypanosomiasis Leishmaniasis  Toxoplasmosis
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor of Pharmacology
Department of Clinical Specialties
Rockefeller Building, Room 204
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Following completion of the preparation material, students should be able to:
1. List the clinically relevant pharmacokinetic properties of the various
chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of protozoan infections and give
examples.
2. Apply the structure activity relationships and mechanisms of action of the various
chemotherapeutics to their use in the treatment of specific protozoan infections
and give examples.
3. Relate the mechanisms of adverse effects and drug interactions to the patients’
drug therapy.
4. Write a second order, board-style question to assess your understanding of the
antiprozoal agents. (Please see the Practice Questions PDF for examples.)
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions (questions FOR learning)
Optional materials:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them.
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and
then again after reviewing.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links
ScholarRx
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: General Microbiology > Infectious Agents > Parasites and
Fungi
Title of Brick(s): Protozoa and Ectoparasites
Link: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/protozoa-and-ectoparasites
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal
Drugs > Malaria
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755910#1204144707
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology 8e,
2023; Chapter 35 Antiprotozoal Drugs > Malaria https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329448&bookid=3222
Access Medicine Katzung & Trevor’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 13e, 2021;
Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal Drugs > Malaria
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com/content.aspx?bookid=3058&sectionid=255307694
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Key points: Pathogenic protozoa
• A wide variety of protozoal parasites can be transmitted to human hosts by insect vectors, directly from
other mammalian reservoirs, of from one person to another. The immune system is critical in protecting
against the pathological effects of infection.
• Amoebiasis caused by Entamoeba histolytica, spread by the fecal-oral route, infects the intestines and
can lead to amoebic dysentery or liver abscess.
• Giardia lamblia is transmitted through contaminated water and leads to diarrhea, cramping, and
malabsorption.
• Trichomonas vaginalis is the most common nonviral sexually transmitted infection worldwide. Infections
range from an acute severe inflammatory disease to asymptomatic carrier state.
• African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) is caused by Trypanosoma brucei spread by tsetse flies and
can lead to CNS infection and coma. Chagas disease, caused by Trypanosoma cruzi and transmitted by
triatomine bugs, can lead to severe heart and digestive disease.
• Leishmania species transmitted by sandflies cause cutaneous / mucocutaneous and visceral disease.
Visceral leishmaniasis is life-threatening.
• Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular parasite transmitted to humans from cats (the only
definitive host), but more commonly via undercooked infected meat products. The infection is often
asymptomatic but can cause serious complications in pregnant individuals and immunocompromised
patients.
• Drug therapy treats infection and reduces transmission. Effective vaccines against protozoal infections
are not available. 5
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Key points (Starred drugs are in bold font.)
Antiprotozoal drugs target protozoal enzymes, metabolic processes, and organelles not present in humans
and, therefore, are more selective for parasitic cells than for human cells. In addition, many protozoa need
anaerobic or microaerophilic environments to function, whereas human cells require oxygen.
• The drugs interfere with protozoal nucleic acid synthesis, inhibit protein synthesis or metabolic
processes, disrupt protozoal organelles and/or membrane integrity.
• Metronidazole, tinidazole, secnidazole, and nitazoxanole are nitroimidazole compounds active against
anaerobic and microaerophilic parasites. They are converted by parasitic pyruvate:ferrodoxin
oxidoreductase to toxic nitro free radical intermediates, which cause death of the parasite. Resistance,
though uncommon, arises through decreased activation or increased inactivation of drug.
• Metronidazole PK: several routes of administration, widely distributed, hepatic metabolism,
bioavailability nearly 100%, and eliminated in urine/feces as active drug and metabolites.
• Metronidazole is used in infants, children, and adults for the treatment of amoebiasis, giardiasis,
trichomoniasis, and anaerobic bacterial infections.
• Tinidazole is used orally or intravaginally for adults and children 3 years old for the same parasitic infections.
• Secnidazole is a long-acting nitroimidazole labeled for oral single-dose treatment of bacterial vaginosis and vaginal
trichomoniasis in patients 12 years old.
• Nitazoxanide is a broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent used orally for the treatment of and cryptosporidiosis-
associated diarrhea, giardiasis, and other parasitic infections.
• Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside (protein synthesis inhibitor), which is not absorbed from the GI tract.
It is administered orally for intestinal amebiasis and certain other luminal parasitic infections. 6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Key points: Trypanosomiasis
• Sleeping sickness, caused byTrypanasoma brucei, is endemic in some regions of sub-Saharan Africa.
T. brucei gambiense causes human West African trypanosomiasis – gambiense HAT. It has an
incubation period of weeks to months and is usually slowly progressive. T. brucei rhodesiense causes
human East African trypanosomiasis – rhodesiense HAT. It has an incubation period of less than three
weeks and is usually rapidly progressive within weeks. Gambiense HAT accounts for a larger burden of
disease than rhodesiense HAT.
• The approach to treatment selection is guided by patient age and weight, drug availability, neurological
signs and symptoms, and CSF findings.
• Fexinidazole is an oral drug preferred for both gambiense and rhodesiense early-stage
(hemolymphatic) HAT in children ≥6 years old, ≥20 kg. It is oral, safer than the other drugs, and crosses
the blood-brain barrier.
• Children <6 years old, <20 kg with early-stage gambiense HAT are treated with IM or IV pentamidine
and, for rhodesiense HAT, with IV suramin.
• Late-stage (meningoencephalitic) gambiense HAT, nonsevere disease, is oral fexinidazole. Oral
nifurtimox with IV eflornithine combination therapy (NECT) is more effective in severe disease and the
preferred treatment.
• Late-stage rhodesiense HAT is treated with the arsenical melarsoprol, which is very toxic.
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Key points
• Fexinidazole, like other nitroimidazoles, is activated by parasite nitroreductase to nitro free radicals that
damage DNA and proteins (the proposed mechanism). PK: oral with the main meal of the day, widely
distributed, extensively metabolized via CYPs to active metabolites, half-life between 9 and 27 hours.
Adverse effects include neuropsychiatric effects, nausea/vomiting, headache, dizziness, tremor,
neutropenia, and QT interval prolongation. Follow-up clinical evaluation should be performed at 6, 12,
18, and 24 months after completion of therapy or at any time symptoms recur due to risk of recurrence,
which has been observed in patients with severe late-stage gambiense HAT.
• Pentamidine isethionate impairs the parasite’s mitochondrial activity and interferes with polyamine
synthesis, RNA polymerase, and ribosomal functions and prevents synthesis of proteins, nucleic acids,
and phospholipids. PK: slow IV infusion; terminal elimination weeks to months. Common adverse effects
include nausea, fatigue, hypoglycemia, and injection site pain and local abscess. Potentially serious
toxicities include reversible bone marrow suppression, hepatoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neuropathy.
• Nifurtimox is an oral trypanocidal imidazole compound taken with food for improved absorption,
metabolized in the liver, excreted in urine as metabolites, and has a half-life of ~3 hours. Common
adverse effects include nausea/vomiting, headache, dizziness, and polyneuropathy.
• Eflornithine is an irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase, which rapidly depletes the parasites
of polyamines. It is given by slow IV infusion and has a half-life of ~3 hours. Toxicities include fever,
pruritis, hypertension, nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, headache, dizziness, seizure, and bone marrow
suppression.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Key points
• Suramin is the preferred agent for early-stage rhodesiense HAT in children <6 years old, <20 kg. It forms
stable complexes with proteins, interacting with a wide variety of biomolecules such as serine
oligopeptidase, dihydrofolate reductase, thymidylate synthase, and several glycolytic enzymes, inhibiting
energy metabolism in the parasite. It is given by slow IV infusion weekly over four weeks, does not
penetrate the CSF, and has a very long half-life (is detectable in urine for 3 months). Early adverse
effects include nausea, vomiting, and fatigue. Severe toxicities that occur over time include bone marrow
toxicity, nephrotoxicity, peripheral nephropathy, chronic diarrhea, and more. Suramin is also active
against the nematode (worm) Onchocerca volvulus that causes river blindness. Coinfected patients
experience severe immunologic reactions. Therefore, coinfection should be excluded before
administering suramin.
• Melarsoprol is the only agent effective against late-stage rhodesiense HAT. It is an arsenical prodrug
converted to the active and extremely toxic melarsen oxide, which reacts avidly and reversibly with
sulfhydryl groups. It forms a melarsen oxide-trypanothione complex that inhibits trypanothione reductase
activity. Melarsen oxide inactivates most enzymes of both parasite and host. Melarsoprol reactive
encephalopathy occurs in up to 18% of patients and is fatal in many of the cases. The drug is toxic to
heart, liver, kidneys, and nerves among others.
9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Key points
• American trypanosomiasis – Chagas disease – is caused by transmission by the triatomine bug
(Reduviidae family). It is treated with the oral imidazole compound benznidazole (preferred, more
tolerable, twice daily dose) or nifurtimox (alternative, three times daily dose). They are reduced by
parasitic nitroreductase to nitro free radicals that form covalent attachment to biomolecules. Both drugs
are trypanocidal against trypomastigote and amastigore forms of T. cruzi. Treatment of acute disease
reduces parasitemia, morbidity, and mortality. Cure rate is >80%, but with geographic variations. For
chronic disease, cures are possible but the drugs are less effective than for acute disease. Adverse
effects include nausea/vomiting, headache, dizziness, and polyneuropathy.
• Leishmania is a trypanosomatid protozoa transmitted by the bite of certain species of sand fly. Diseases
include cutaneous leishmaniasis (Old World and New World varieties) and visceral leishmaniasis (kala-
azar). Leishmania species differ in their sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents.
• Sodium stibogluconate (most countries) and meglumine (French-speaking countries) are pentavalent
antimonial agents widely used first-line agents. Pentavalent prodrugs are reduced to trivalent antimonial
by parasitic reductase, which inhibits trypanothione reductase, which interferes with trypanothione redox
system, inducing rapid efflux of trypanothione and glutathione from the cell and also inhibiting
trypanothione reductase. PK: IV administration, drug is sequestered in tissues, terminal half-life of up to
80 hours. The antimonials are fairly well tolerated. Adverse effects include dose-related muscle aches,
nausea/vomiting, fatigue, and rash and nonspecific EKG changes, such as T wave suppression and QT
interval prolongation. Additional potentially serious toxicities include bone marrow suppression,
hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and pancreatitis. 10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Key points
• Amphotericin B liposomal IV is recommended in certain areas of India and Nepal where there is
resistance to the antimonials. Amphotericin B has a high cure rate in the treatment of mucocutaneous and
visceral leishmaniasis. Toxicities are infusion reactions (“shake and bake”), nephrotoxicity, anemia,
hypersensitivity reactions, and more.
• Miltefosine is the first consistently effective and safe oral drug for visceral, mucosal, and cutaneous
leishmaniasis, but efficacy varies significantly by species and by geography. Its mechanism is not known.
It is also effective against free-living encephalitic amoeba, such as Naegleria fowleri. As a phospholipid, it
may interact with phospholipids and steroids in parasitic cell membranes, inhibition of cytochrome c
oxidase which inhibits mitochondrial function, and apoptosis-like death. Adverse effects are common,
generally mild nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, anemia/decreased platelet count, increased serum
aminotransferases, increased serum creatinine, headache, dizziness, rash, urticaria, SJS (rare).
Contraindicated in all trimesters of pregnancy – teratogenic, fetotoxic. Breast feeding should be avoided.
Reduced sperm count, mobility, and morphology, decreased ejaculate volume, scrotal pain and
tenderness in males.
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Key points
• Toxoplasmosis is an acute, self-limiting illness in most people, which does not require treatment.
Immunocompetent persons with primary infection are usually asymptomatic. Toxoplamosis has a
worldwide distribution.
• Pregnant patients are treated for acute acquired toxoplasmosis to prevent transmission to the fetus.
Treatment at <14 weeks gestation is with spiramycin, an oral macrolide that concentrates in the
placenta. If >18 weeks gestation and documented fetal infection, then pyrimethamine plus
sulfadiazine plus leucovorin is administered.
• HIV/AIDS patients with cerebral toxoplasmosis are treated with oral pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine
plus leucovorin or TMP-SMX IV, followed by suppressive therapy with pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine
+ leucovorin.
• Toxoplamosis prophylaxis in HIV/AIDS patients is oral TMP-SMX.
12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Outline
Drugs for the treatment of:
1. Amoebiasis, giardiasis, trichomoniasis
2. Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) (sleeping sickness)
• gambiense HAT
• rhodesiense HAT
3. American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
4. Leishmaniasis
5. Toxoplasmosis
Some drugs are FDA approved. Others are not FDA approved and are available
from the CDC or through an FDA investigational new drug protocol.
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Agents used in the treatment of
Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia, and Trichomonas infections
Metronidazole
Tinidazole: better tolerated than metronidazole and less frequent dosing
a nitroimidazole Secnidazole: bacterial vaginosis only
Paromomycin
Nitazoxanide: Diarrhea caused by giardiasis and cryptosporidiosis (adults,
children); and other parasitic diarrheal diseases in children
Iodoquinol; Diloxanide furoate: Marketing has been discontinued.
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Entamoeba histolytica. A. Cyst structures. B. Giardia lamblia. A. Cyst structures. B. Trichomonas vaginalis. The parasite and
Trophozoite structures. C. Trophozoite in stool Trophozoite structures. C. Cyst in stool its structures are shown in relation to the
(arrow). D. Cyst (arrow) in stool iodine size of a polymorphonuclear leukocyte
iodine preparation. D. Trophozoite in
preparation and cysts in stool iodine (top). The micrograph below illustrates
stool. (CandD, Reproduced with
preparation. their use for motility. (Reproduced with
permission from Connor DH, Chandler
permission from Nester EW, Anderson
FW, Schwartz DQ, et al: Pathology of
DG, Roberts CE Jr, et al: Microbiology: A
Infectious Diseases. Stamford CT:
Human Perspective, 6th ed. New York,
Appleton & Lange; 1997.) NY: McGraw Hill; 2008.)
Citation: Chapter 52 Sarcomastigophora—The Amebas, and Chapter 53: Sarcomastigophora —The Flagellates Ryan KJ. Sherris & Ryan's
Medical Microbiology, 8e; 2022. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3107&sectionid=260930186
Accessed: May 10, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved 15
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Metronidazole Pharmacokinetics
A Oral, ~100% bioavailability, IV
topical, intravaginal → low systemic concentrations
D Widely distributed, Penetrates body tissues and fluids well,
bile, seminal fluid, bone, liver, and liver abscesses, lung and vaginal secretions, saliva and CSF
M Hepatic, CYP2A6, several metabolites including active metabolite Tinidazole: CYP3A4
E Urine, some unchanged drug and metabolites
t½ 8 h adults; longer in premature and term neonates Tinidazole: ~13 h
Dosing: Adults: 3 times daily Tinidazole: once daily
PK relevance:
Metronidazole and tinidazole have good oral bioavailability and penetrate infected tissues in
therapeutic concentrations, including abscesses.
Tinidazole has a longer half-life → less frequent dosing.
16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Metronidazole Regeneration / Resistance Mechanisms
Metronidazole
reduction
Metronidazole
nitroso radical
Regeneration Highly reactive
of reduced nitroso
metronidazole radicals
Oxidation of
nitroso
radicals
Resistance (uncommon) http://watcut.uwaterloo.ca/webnotes/Pharmacology/AntimicrobialChemotherapy.html
•  drug activation: Impaired O scavenging capabilities →  local O →  reduction of metronidazole
2 2
• Futile cycling: Increased inactivation of the active toxic intermediate
17
• Lower PFOR levels and ferrodoxin levels: These organisms respond at higher drug doses
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Metronidazole Clinical Applications
Activity:
Therapeutic uses:
Anaerobic and microaerophilic pathogens,
Amoebiasis
such as amitochondriate protozoa T.
Trichomoniasis
vaginalis, E. histolytica, and G. lamblia
Giardiasis
• Kills E. hystolytica trophozoites
Anaerobic bacterial infections
• but not cysts
Tinidazole equally effective
• Acts on organisms in bowel wall and
• amoebiasis, giardiasis, trichomoniasis
liver
Helicobacter pylori (combination Tx)
• Eradicates extra-intestinal infection
• Longer t½ ; may be better tolerated
(liver abscess is most common)
than metronidazole
Follow up with a luminal amebicide for Secnidazole
eradication of parasites. • bacterial vaginosis, trichomoniasis
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Metronidazole Side Effects
Generally well tolerated US Boxed Warning
• Common: headache, nausea, dry mouth, and a Metronidazole and tinidazole have been
metallic taste shown to be carcinogenic in mice and
rats.
• Occasional: vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
distress, thrush, dark urine Practice point:
• Dizziness, vertigo • Unnecessary use of the drugs should
• Very rarely, encephalopathy, convulsions be avoided. Use should be reserved
for indicated conditions.
• Paresthesia
• Pregnancy: Treatment is recommended.
Drug interactions: (not a complete list)
Metronidazole crosses placenta but appears to
• Metronidazole: Warfarin
have a low risk to the developing fetus.
• Tinidazole: CYP3A4-mediated
➢ Vaginal administration, tinidazole, and
interaction
secnidazole should be avoided.
It has been thought that metronidazole ingested with alcohol causes a disulfiram-like reaction.
Reevaluation of available data suggests that this is not the case (Feldman & Jaszczenski, 2023)
19
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Paromomycin: A Luminal Aminoglycoside
PK Oral; poor absorption – remains in the intestine = luminal; 100% fecal excretion
Mechanism Protein synthesis inhibitor by binding the 16S rRNA of the 30S ribosome interfering
of action with the protein synthesis machinery
Uses Acute and chronic intestinal (luminal) amebiasis following nitroimidazole
treatment
• Cryptosporidium-associated diarrhea in patients with HIV
Cryptosporidium is a protozoan parasite spread by the fecal-oral route from
contaminated water sources.
• Giardia lamblia alternative for mild giardiasis
• Hepatic encephalopathy:
Reduces systemic ammonia levels by killing ammonia-producing bacteria in the gut.
• Topical: cutaneous leishmaniasis IV: visceral leishmaniasis
Side effects GI effects: abdominal cramps, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting
Parenteral: nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, muscle weakness
(as for all aminoglycosides)
20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the medical justifications for using two different drugs in the treatment of amoebiasis? What are the
drugs described in this PowerPoint?
• Metronidazole is a tissue-acting drug to eliminate invasive trophozoites, particularly in cases of amoebic
liver abscess or systemic infection.
• Paromomycin (oral) is a luminal agent that acts in the intestines to eliminate amoeba cysts and
trophozoites, which prevents recurrence and transmission.
What are their mechanisms of action?
• Metronidazole: Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free radicals (reactive oxygen species)
that damage DNA and proteins
• Paromomycin: Protein synthesis inhibitor, binds 16S rRNA on the 30S ribosome.
What other organisms are susceptible to each of the drugs?
• Metronidazole is active against the protozoa Trichomonas vaginalis and Giardia lamblia as well
Entamoeba histolytica.
• FYI: Metronidazole is also effective against obligate anaerobic gram-negative and gram-positive
bacteria, including C. difficile.
• Paromomycin is active against luminal protoazoa G. lamblia and Cryptosporidium and Leishmania,
which causes cutaneous, mucosal, and visceral infection.
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Agents for the treatment of
Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT)
Gambiense HAT Rhodesiense HAT
T. brucei gambiense T. brucei rhodesiense
Fexinidazole Fexinidazole
Pentamidine Suramin
Nifurtimox Melarsoprol
Arsenic
#33
Eflornithine
The approach to treatment selection is based on assessment of neurological signs and
symptoms of severe disease. CSF examination is required for patients with signs and symptoms of
late-stage severe disease and for patients who cannot be treated with fexinidazole.
22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
African sleeping sickness. Trypanosoma brucei in a routine blood
smear. (Reproduced with permission from Nester EW, Anderson DG,
Stages in the life cycle of the hemoflagellates
Roberts CE Jr, et al: Microbiology: A Human Perspective, 6th ed. New
(Trypanosomidae).
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2008.)
Citation: Chapter 53 Sarcomastigophora—The Flagellates, Ryan KJ. Sherris & Ryan's Medical Microbiology, 8e;
2022. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3107&sectionid=260930292
Accessed: May 10, 2023 Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Trypanosomiasis, caused by the bite of the tsetse fly
Gambiense HAT Rhodesiense HAT
2 C
2 a
0 West African sleeping sickness u
East African sleeping sickness
2 s
e
n
d
i • Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
n • Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense ~
o 5
i %
t
c Causes the chronic form of the disease.
e Causes acute, rapidly progressive disease o
f f
n t
i West and Central Africa h
n e
East and Southern Africa
a
c
m
a
• Democratic Republic of Congo
s
u
e
h • Tanzania
s
f o • Angola o
f
s • southern Uganda h
e
u
s • South Sudan
a m
c
a
• Malawi
e n
h • Central African Republic
i
t n
f f
o • Zambia (formerly Northern Rhodesia) e
• Chad c
% t
i
5 o
9 • Zimbabwe (formerly Southern Rhodesia) n
• northern Uganda
~
i
n
d
e 2
A few hundred cases reported annually to
s 7,000-10,000 cases reported annually 0
u 2
a 2
C the WHO.
https://www.cdc.gov/sleeping-sickness/causes/?CDC_AAref_Val=https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/epi.html 24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Overview of Treatment for HAT
Gambiense HAT Rhodesiense HAT
<6 years old, <20 kg 6 years, 20 kg Patients of all ages
(1) Pentamidine (1) Fexinidazole1 (1) Fexinidazole1 6 years, 20 kg
(A) Pentamidine (1) Suramin <6 years old, <20 kg
Early-stage disease
(A) Eflornithine2 (A) Pentamidine, acute disease, until
hemolymphatic stage
(R) NECT3 suramin can be obtained
(R) Melarsoprol
(1) Fexinidazole1 (nonsevere disease) (1) Melarsoprol, with oral prednisolone
Late-stage disease
(1) NECT (severe disease, all ages) If onset of encephalopathy, discontinue
meningoencephalic
(A) Eflornithine3, if NECT not available melarsoprol.
stage
(R) Melarsoprol (A) Fexinidazole if melarsoprol cannot be used
Pregnancy (WHO guidelines) Safety data are very limited Goal: Life-saving therapy
Treatment may reduce the likelihood of vertical transmission.
Newborns should be examined, undergo blood evaluation for circulating trypanosomes, and be
followed clinically.
1st trimester: Pentamidine, Fexinidazole Acute, rapidly progressive disease – do not delay
2nd trimester: Nifurtimox, Eflornithine, NECT treatment.
1Fexinidazole should be administered only if there is a high confidence of long-term (up to 24
months) follow up for early detection of relapse.
2Eflorinithine monotherapy
3NECT=Nifuritimox-Eflornithine Combination Therapy
(1) First-line, (A) Alternative if preferred drug is not available,
(R) Rescue = Treatment in cases of treatment failure with a preferred or alternative agent 25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Pharmacokinetics and Mechanisms of Drugs for gambiense HAT
Proposed
PK Profiles Mechanisms of Action
Fexinidazole Oral with meal, large V , high protein Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free
d
binding, t½ up to 27 h radicals that damage DNA and proteins
loading dose qd x4d,
then maintenance dose qd x6d
Pentamidine IV, IM Interference with kinetoplast DNA, inhibits RNA and
Binds plasma and tissue proteins ribosomal function, and nucleic acid synthesis
high concentrations in organs
poor CNS penetration Kinetoplast: Structure in mitochondria of Trypanosoma
t½ 6-10 h and Leishmania essential for survival and energy
production
1x daily for 7-10 days
Nifurtimox Oral, t½ ~3 h Like the fexinidazole
3x daily x10 days
(PK info is limited.)
Eflornithine IV every 6h x 7d • Suicide inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase
t½ 1.5-5 h • Inhibits polyamine synthesis, cell growth and
(PK info is limited.) differentiation
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Adverse Effects of Drugs for gambiense HAT
Adverse effects: Common / Potentially Serious (not a complete list)
Fexinidazole Relatively well tolerated
Neuropsychiatric effects (agitation, anxiety, insomnia, hallucination, psychosis)
Neutropenia (monitor)
QTc prolongation
Pentamidine Relatively well tolerated
Common: nausea, anorexia, dizziness, pruritis, injection site reaction
Electrolyte abnormalities / hypoglycemia / renal insufficiency
Nifurtimox Common (generally reversible)
Nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss headache, dizziness, vertigo, insomnia,
polyneuropathy
Eflornithine Frequent, generally reversible:
fever, pruritus, hypertension, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, headaches,
dizziness, hearing loss, seizure, arthralgia, rash, alopecia, and bone marrow
suppression – anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia
27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Pharmacokinetics and Mechanisms of Drugs for rhodesiense HAT
Suramin, polyanionic compound Melarsoprol arsenical
PK Slow IV infusion, protein binding 99% Slow IV (very irritating)
Does not cross BBB Penetrates CSF
Excreted in urine, detectable up to 3 months Rapid conversion to active trivalent melarsen oxide
t½ 44-54 days Terminal t½ ~35 h
MOA Inhibits glycolytic enzymes, disrupting energy Melarsen oxide reacts avidly and reversibly with
metabolism sulfhydryl groups on adjacent carbon atoms, including
Blocks NADH oxidation, impairing respiration forming a melarsen oxide-trypanothione complex,
and energy production which inhibits trypanothione reductase
Blocks purinergic signaling, interfering with Inactivates many enzymes of both the host and
cellular processes the organism.
Adverse Immediate hypersensitivity reaction with Melarsoprol reactive encephalopathy – can be fatal
effects shock Toxicity to all organs can occur:
nephrotoxicity, peripheral nephropathy, Heart, liver, kidney, bone marrow, GI tract, nerves
exfoliative dermatitis, bone marrow toxicity (including paralysis)
Coinfection: Onchocerca volvulus (worm, river Avoid in pregnancy.
blindness) → severe immune reaction
Avoid suramin in patients who may have
O. volvulus coinfection 28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the therapeutic uses of fexinidazole?
• All patients ≥6 years old, ≥20 kg for treatment of early-stage gambiense and rhodesiense HAT
and in nonsevere late-stage gambiense HAT.
What are the favorable properties of fexinidazole compared to the other anti-HAT drugs?
• Oral, safer than the other drugs, crosses the blood-brain barrier.
Why is long-term follow-up after fexinidazole treatment essential?
• Follow-up for up to 24 months is required to detect relapse. Treatment failures can occur.
Recurrence rates vary based on the patient’s adherence to the oral therapy (fexinidazole),
severity of the disease, and the patient’s immune response.
What are the preferred agents for severe late-stage gambiense HAT and for rhodesiense HAT?
• Gambiense HAT: NECT – nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy
• Rhodesiense HAT: melarsoprol, the only effective agent
Melarsoprol would be effective in early- and late-stage infection of both HAT diseases so why is it
the first-line drug only in late-stage rhodesiense HAT?
• It is very toxic and toxicity occurs frequently. Severe and common effects include heart, liver,
kidney, bone marrow, GI tract, nerve toxicities. 29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Check your knowledge
• What are the mechanisms of action and major toxicities of the drugs for HAT treatment?
Fexinidazole Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitro free radicals that damage DNA and proteins
• Neuropsychiatric effects; neutropenia; QTc prolongation
Pentamidine Possibly interference with kinetoplast DNA, RNA and ribosomal function, and nucleic acid
synthesis
• Electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, renal insufficiency
Nifurtimox Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free radicals (reactive oxygen species) that
damage DNA and proteins
• GI complaints, vertigo, insomnia, polyneuropathy
Eflornithine Suicide inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase which suppresses polyamine synthesis, cell
growth and differentiation
• Diarrhea, leukopenia, anemia, hair loss, tinnitus, elevated LFTs, dizziness, headache
Suramin Possibly forms stable complexes with proteins and reacts with a variety of biomolecules
• Effects are common: immediate hypersensitivity reaction with shock, skin eruptions,
vomiting, photophobia, peripheral neuropathy, anaphylaxis, nephrotox.
Melarsoprol Melarsen oxide reacts avidly and reversibly with sulfhydryl groups on adjacent carbon
atoms, which inactivates many enzymes of both the host and the organism, including
forming a melarsen oxide-trypanothione complex, which inhibits trypanothione reductase
30
• Severe effects common: heart, liver, kidney, bone marrow, GI tract, nerve toxicities
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Agents for the treatment of
AMERICAN trypanosomiasis
Trypanosoma cruzi
Chagas disease
benznidazole nifurtimox
Benznidazole
Nifurtimox
Chagas disease.
A. Acute myocarditis with atrophic
myofibers separated by inflammatory cells.
B.Trypanosoma cruzi amastigotes clustered
in myofiber from the same case.
(Reproduced with permission from Connor
DH, Chandler FW, Schwartz DQ, et al:
Pathology of Infectious Diseases. Stamford
CT: Appleton & Lange; 1997.)
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Pharmacology: Benznidazole and Nifurtimox
Benznidazole (preferred agent) Nifurtimox
PK Oral; eliminated in urine/feces; Oral; eliminated in urine as metabolites
t ½ ~12h t½ ~3h
Dosing 2x daily x 60 days Dosing 3x daily x 60 days
Mechanism Reduced by trypanosomal enzyme trypanosomal nitroreductase → nitro anion free radicals →
generate reactive oxygen species that form covalent attachments with parasite’s DNA and
other macromolecules → membrane injury, enzyme inactivation, DNA damage
Varies with geography, phase, and form of the disease
Effectiveness
Acute Chagas disease: Cure rates >80% (variable)
Adverse effects Photosensitivity → rash, may progress to Common: GI and CNS effects
include severe dermatitis rarely Nausea/vomiting, abdominal discomfort
Peripheral neuropathy Irritability, disorientation, headache,
Bone marrow suppression (rare) dizziness, insomnia
Severe effects → interrupt therapy Less common: paresthesia, polyneuropathy,
tremors
Avoid in Animal reproduction studies suggest harm to the fetus. Data on the treatment of acute
pregnancy Chagas disease is limited. There are no specific recommendations for preventing vertical
transmission of disease in pregnant patients.
32
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Disseminated cutaneous leishmaniasis associated with Chronic nonhealing leishmaniasis recidivans:
specific anergy induced by Leishmania aethiopica Satellite lesions developing around an old sore
infection.
Agents for the treatment of leishmaniasis
Sodium Stibogluconate / Meglumine Antimoniate
Amphotericin B, liposomal
 Miltefosine
Antimony
Paromomycin
Sb #51
33
Sodium Stibogluconate
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Leishmaniasis
• Vector borne – sand fly
• Leishmania are a heterogenous group of protozoa (Order: Trypanosomatida).
• Endemic in Southern Europe, subtropical, tropical regions
• Obligate intracellular parasites that infect and proliferate in macrophages,
monocytes, and other types of phagocytes
• Diseases are characterized by inflammation, infiltration, and necrosis.
Leishmania species produce widely varying clinical syndromes ranging from self-
healing cutaneous ulcers to fatal visceral disease.
Visceral leishmaniasis
Mucosal leishmaniasis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis (Old World and New World varieties)
34
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Pharmacology of the Pentavalent Antimonials: Sod. Stibogluconate, Meglumine
PK IV, IM sequester in tissues (eg liver, spleen) urine, unchanged t½ ~30-80 h
terminal
MOA Mechanism unclear. Likely involves several pathways:
Pentavalent antimonial is reduced within the parasite→ toxic Sb3+ species→ may bind thiol groups and interfere
with various enzymatic systems→ inhibits ATP and GTP availability, disrupts DNA transcription and replication,
and other metabolic pathways→ kills amastigotes in phagolysosomes of macrophages
Uses Leishmaniasis:
Cutaneous: intralesional injection (also paromomycin topical / nondrug approaches: cryo- and thermotherapy)
Mucosal forms: First-line therapy throughout the world
Leishmaniasis, visceral (Kala-azar): Alternative to liposomal amphotericin B (AMB is first-line)
Efficacy: >95% effective outside certain regions of India
AEs Relatively well-tolerated. Toxicity increases over the course of therapy (cumulative doses) and is reversible.
• Cardiac: nonspecific EKG changes: T wave suppression, QTc interval prolongation
• Hematology: Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia may occur (correct iron deficiency prior to therapy)
• Hepatotoxicity; pancreatitis; renal toxicity; muscle aches, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, rash
➢ Practice point: Monitoring, prior to and weekly during therapy: EKG, CBC, and serum creatinine,
transaminases, lipase and amylase levels.
Pregnancy Safe use has not been established.
Visceral leishmaniasis is potentially fatal, patients should always be treated without delay. 35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Leishmaniasis: Additional drug treatments
Drug Cutaneous Visceral Post kala-azar
Proposed mechanism leishmaniasis leishmaniasis dermal lesions
Amphotericin B IV daily for 6-7 doses  Preferred option, including pregnancy IV to cumulative dose
liposomal or IV 0.5-1 mg/kg daily or IV to cumulative dose
Deoxycholate every other day for  Secondary prophylaxis (Mediterranean,
(infusion reactions, cumulative 15-30 mg/kg South Asia, the Americas)
nephrotoxicity, anemia) dose IV every 3-4 weeks
Forms complex with ergosterol in the cell membrane (like the antifungal action), forming pores, causing leakage of
cellular contents.
Miltefosine Oral TID x 28 days Oral TID x28 days Preferred option
alternative Oral x12 weeks
Probably interacts with phospholipids and steroids in parasitic cell membranes, inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase which
inhibits mitochondrial function, and apoptosis-like death
Paromomycin Topical ointment or cream IV or IM x21 days in comb. w miltefosine
protein synthesis or antimonial
inhibitor Preferred in East Africa
Pentamidine Alternative Secondary prophylaxis
Isothionate IV or IM weekly x3 doses (east Africa)
unknown mechanism Suboptimal efficacy and IV every 3-4 weeks
toxicity
Fluconazole Oral daily x 6 weeks
36
Ketoconazole Oral daily x 28 days
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Agents used in the treatment of
toxoplasmosis
Spiramycin
Pyrimethamine + leucovorin (folinic acid) + sulfadiazine
Toxoplasma gondii. A. Invasive
trophozoite forms. B. Cyst in
(alternatives for sulfadiazine: Atovaquone or Clindamycin)
tissue. (Reproduced with
permission from Nester EW,
Anderson DG, Roberts CE Jr,
et al: Microbiology: A Human
Perspective, 6th ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2008.)
Citation: Chapter 51 Apicomplexa and Microsporidia, Ryan KJ. Sherris & Ryan's Medical Microbiology, 8e; 2022. Available
at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=260929904&bookid=3107 Accessed: May 10, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved 37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii: Cats are natural hosts.
• Toxoplasmosis is an acute, self-limiting illness in most people.
• In pregnancy, vertical transmission to the fetus causes congenital toxoplasmosis.
• Immunocompromised HIV/AIDS patients are at risk for developing toxoplasmic
encephalitis.
Pregnancy:
oral Spiramycin (a macrolide antibiotic) at <14 weeks gestation
oral Pyrimethamine + leucovorin + sulfadiazine 14 weeks gestation and
documented fetal infection
HIV/AIDS: Treatment of cerebral toxoplasmosis
oral Pyrimethamine + leucovorin + sulfadiazine or IV TMP-SMX
(alternatives if sulfonamide is not tolerated: atovaquone or clindamycin)
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Check your knowledge
Which of the following is frequently used for the treatment of leishmaniasis?
A. Folate synthesis inhibition disrupts DNA synthesis.
B. Nitroso free radicals generate reactive oxygen species that form covalent attachments with
parasite’s DNA and other macromolecules causing membrane injury, enzyme inactivation, DNA
damage
C. Protein synthesis inhibition by binding the 16S rRNA of the 30S ribosome, which interferes with
the protein synthesis machinery.
D. Toxic Sb3+ interferes with various enzymatic systems, which disrupts ATP and GTP availability,
DNA transcription and replication, and other metabolic pathways
• D. Pentavalent antimonials sodium stibogluconate and meglumine inhibit ATP and GTP
availability, disrupt DNA transcription and replication, and other metabolic pathways
What are the drugs in each of the options?
A. Pyrimethamine: DHFR inhibitor and Sulfadiazine: dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS)
B. Metronidazole, fexinidazole, nifurtimox, benznidazole
C. Paromomycin
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Check your knowledge
Looking at the mechanisms of action of the antiprotozoal drugs, what is the common thread?
• Antiparasitic drugs generate free radicals and reactive oxygen species during activation, which
damage cellular and molecular structures, or complex and inactivate cellular proteins or
interfere with metabolism. Thus, parasites die.
What are the preferred drugs for treatment of the following parasitic infections?
• Amoebiasis: metronidazole (systemic); paromomycin (luminal)
• Gambiense HAT: fexinidazole early-stage, nonsevere late-stage 6 years old; NECT severe late stage
• Rhodesiense HAT: fexinidazole early-stage 6 years old; melarsoprol late-stage
• Chagas disease: benznidazole (better tolerated); nifurtimox
• Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis: sod. stibogluconate / meglumine
• Visceral leishmaniasis: amphotercin B / pentavalent antimonial / miltefosine (oral)
• Toxoplasmosis, first trimester: spiramycin
• Toxoplasmosis, 14 weeks gestation: pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine + leucovorin
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
The answers to the Check Your Knowledge questions
summarize the pharmacology of the non-plasmodial
antiprotozoal drugs.
41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the medical justifications for using two different drugs in the treatment of amoebiasis? What are the
drugs described in this PowerPoint?
• Metronidazole is a tissue-acting drug to eliminate invasive trophozoites, particularly in cases of amoebic
liver abscess or systemic infection.
• Paromomycin (oral) is a luminal agent that acts in the intestines to eliminate amoeba cysts and
trophozoites, which prevents recurrence and transmission.
What are their mechanisms of action?
• Metronidazole: Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free radicals (reactive oxygen species)
that damage DNA and proteins
• Paromomycin: Protein synthesis inhibitor, binds 16S rRNA on the 30S ribosome.
What other organisms are susceptible to each of the drugs?
• Metronidazole is active against the protozoa Trichomonas vaginalis and Giardia lamblia as well
Entamoeba histolytica.
• FYI: Metronidazole is also effective against obligate anaerobic gram-negativeand gram-positive bacteria,
including C. difficile.
• Paromomycin is active against luminal protoazoa G. lamblia and Cryptosporidium and Leishmania,
which causes cutaneous, mucosal, and visceral infection.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the therapeutic uses of fexinidazole?
• All patients ≥6 years old, ≥20 kg for treatment of early-stage gambiense and rhodesiense HAT
and in nonsevere late-stage gambiense HAT.
What are the favorable properties of fexinidazole compared to the other anti-HAT drugs?
• Oral, safer than the other drugs, crosses the blood-brain barrier.
Why is long-term follow-up after fexinidazole treatment essential?
• Follow-up for up to 24 months is required to detect relapse. Treatment failures can occur.
Recurrence rates vary based on the patient’s adherence to the oral therapy (fexinidazole),
severity of the disease, and the patient’s immune response.
What are the preferred agents for severe late-stage gambiense HAT and for rhodesiense HAT?
• Gambiense HAT: NECT – nifurtimox eflornithine combination therapy
• Rhodesiense HAT: melarsoprol, the only effective agent
Melarsoprol would be effective in early- and late-stage infection of both HAT diseases so why is it
the first-line drug only in late-stage rhodesiense HAT?
• It is very toxic and toxicity occurs frequently. Severe and common effects include heart, liver,
kidney, bone marrow, GI tract, nerve toxicities. 43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Check your knowledge
• What are the mechanisms of action and major toxicities of the drugs for HAT treatment?
Fexinidazole Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free radicals (reactive oxygen species) that
damage DNA and proteins
• Neuropsychiatric effects; neutropenia; QTc prolongation
Pentamidine Possibly interference with kinetoplast DNA, RNA and ribosomal function, and nucleic acid
synthesis
• Electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, renal insufficiency
Nifurtimox Activation by parasite nitroreductase to nitroso free radicals that damage DNA and proteins
• GI complaints, vertigo, insomnia, polyneuropathy
Eflornithine Suicide inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase which suppresses polyamine synthesis, cell
growth and differentiation
• Diarrhea, leukopenia, anemia, hair loss, tinnitus, elevated LFTs, dizziness, headache
Suramin Possibly forms stable complexes with proteins and reacts with a variety of biomolecules
• Adverse effects are common: immediate hypersensitivity reaction with shock, skin
eruptions, vomiting, photophobia, peripheral neuropathy, anaphylaxis, nephrotoxicity
Melarsoprol Melarsen oxide reacts avidly and reversibly with sulfhydryl groups on adjacent carbon
atoms, which inactivates many enzymes of both the host and the organism, including
forming a melarsen oxide-trypanothione complex, which inhibits trypanothione reductase
• Severe effects common: heart, liver, kidney, bone marrow, GI tract, nerve toxicities 44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Check your knowledge
Which of the following is frequently used for the treatment of leishmaniasis?
A. Folate synthesis inhibition disrupts DNA synthesis.
B. Nitroso free radicals generate reactive oxygen species that form covalent attachments with parasite’s
DNA and other macromolecules causing membrane injury, enzyme inactivation, DNA damage
C. Protein synthesis inhibition by binding the 16S rRNA of the 30S ribosome, which interferes with the
protein synthesis machinery.
D. Toxic Sb3+ interferes with various enzymatic systems, which disrupts ATP and GTP availability, DNA
transcription and replication, and other metabolic pathways
• Answer: D. Pentavalent antimonials sodium stibogluconate and meglumine inhibit ATP and GTP
availability, disrupt DNA transcription and replication, and other metabolic pathways
What are the drugs in each of the options?
A. Pyrimethamine: DHFR inhibitor and Sulfadiazine: dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS)
B. Metronidazole, fexinidazole, nifurtimox, benznidazole
C. Paromomycin
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Check your knowledge
Looking at the mechanisms of action of the antiprotozoal drugs, what is the common thread?
• Antiparasitic drugs generate free radicals and reactive oxygen species during activation, which damage
cellular and molecular structures, or complex and inactivate cellular proteins or interfere with
metabolism. Thus, parasites die.
What are the preferred drugs for treatment of the following parasitic infections?
• Amoebiasis: metronidazole (systemic); paromomycin (luminal)
• Gambiense HAT: fexinidazole early-stage, nonsevere late-stage 6 years old; NECT severe late stage
• Rhodesiense HAT: fexinidazole early-stage 6 years old; melarsoprol late-stage
• Chagas disease: benznidazole (better tolerated); nifurtimox
• Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis: sod. stibogluconate / meglumine
• Visceral leishmaniasis: amphotercin B / pentavalent antimonial / miltefosine (oral)
• Toxoplasmosis, first trimester: spiramycin
• Toxoplasmosis, 14 weeks gestation: pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine + leucovorin
46
--- SLIDE 47 ---
References
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023; Chapter 67:
Chemotherapy of Protozoal Infections: Amebiasis, Giardiasis, Trichomoniasis, Trypanosomiasis, Leishmaniasis,
and Other Protozoal Infection
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e, 2023; Chapter 222. Pharmacology of Agents
Used to Treat Parasitic Infections and Chapter 227: Chagas Disease and African Trypanosomiasis
• Access Medicine Jawetz, Melnick & Adleberg’s Medical Microbiology, 28e, 2019 Chapter 46: Medical
Parasitology
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 52: Antiprotozoal Drugs
• Access Medicine Sherris & Ryan’s Medical Microbiology, 8e, 2022; Chapter 52: Sarcomastigophora: The
Amebas; Chapter 53: Sacromastigophora: The Flagellates
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/
• Lexidrugs monographs
• The Sanford Guide to Antimicrobial Therapy, 52e, 2022
• UpToDate: various topics; literature reviews are current
• World Health Organization WHO: Essential Medicines and Health Products Information Portal
https://www.who.int/
• Feldman R, Jaszczenski R. Can Metronidazole Cause a Disulfiram-Like Reaction? A Case-Control Study
Propensity Matched by Age, Sex, and Ethanol Concentration. WMJ. 2023 Jul;122(3):171-177. PMID: 37494646.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37494646/
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R