SOURCE: Lecture # 178. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antifungal Agents
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor of Pharmacology
Department of Clinical Specialties
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Following this session, students should be able to:
1. PK: Apply the pharmacokinetic profiles of the various systemic antifungal agents to their
clinical relevance in optimizing therapy for the individual patient when given a case
vignette.
2. Mechanisms: Compare the mechanisms of action and mechanisms of resistance of the
various classes of antifungal agents using specific examples.
3. Therapeutic uses: Correlate the therapeutic uses with the antifungal spectrums and
resistance patterns using specific examples.
4. Adverse effects: Relate the common and potentially serious adverse effects and
precautions of the various antifungal agents to the management of antifungal therapy when
given a case vignette.
5. Drug interactions: Explain the mechanisms and potential impact of drug interactions
involving specific antifungal agents on the management of antifungal therapy in the individual
patient using specific examples.
3
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Preparation Materials
Required
• Practice Questions
Optional materials:
• Video lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Notes Handout  ScholarRx Bricks  Guided Reading
Questions
• Textbooks and Examination Review Books (please see next slide)
SUGGESTIONS:
• Use the resources that work best for you.
• You do not need to study all of them. (ScholarRx Bricks & Practice Questions are
required.)
• Working through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper may
help you recall what you have learned.
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and then
again after reviewing.
• Practice questions (not graded): Simple Recall and Case Vignettes
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
Links
Scholar Rx Brick:
Name of Discipline/ Organ System: General Microbiology > Antimicrobial Agents > Antifungal Drugs
Title of Brick(s): Drugs to Treat Fungal Infections
Link(s): https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-fungal-infections
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 16e, 2024: Chapter 48: Antifungal Agents
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755133
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review 14e, 2024: Chapter 48:
Antifungal Agents
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285598727
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e,
2022; Chapter 33: Antifungal Drugs
https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
5
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329130&bookid=3222
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Key points
• Fungi are eukaryotic, with rigid cell walls composed mainly of fibrillar polysaccharides, largely
β-1,3-glucan and chitin, that bind covalently to each other and to proteins. The fungal cell
membrane contains ergosterol rather than the cholesterol, as in mammalian cells.
• Fungal diseases are called mycoses and are often chronic infections. They may involve only
the skin extending into the epidermis or may cause subcutaneous or systemic infections.
• Clinical response to antifungal treatment can be lengthy because fungi are complex slow-
growing organisms with thick walls often embedded deep in tissues.
• Patients with chronic immune suppression due to organ transplantation, cancer chemotherapy,
or HIV infection are susceptible to opportunistic fungal infections. Morbidity is high in
immunosuppressed patients.
• Targets of antifungal drugs include components of the cell wall, ergosterol in the membrane,
and nuclear functions.
• Drugs for the treatment of systemic mycoses include the polyene antifungals, azole antifungals,
and echinocandins.
• Many azole antifungals and other structurally diverse drugs are used topically for superficial
fungal infections.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Key points: Targets and Drug Classes
Polyenes: Amphotericin B and Nystatin: Amphipathic amphoteric molecules
Bind ergosterol → form pores in the membranes → leakage
Broad spectrum, Resistance is rare.
• Amphtericin B: I.V.life-threatening infectionsnephrotoxicity, electrolyte wasting, infusion rxns
• Lipid / liposomal formulations reduce toxicity.
• Nystatin: topical only due to severe toxicity, including nephrotoxity, when given IV
Flucytosine→ 5-FU: Inhibits fungal DNA and RNA synthesis → leads to impairment of protein
synthesis and fungal cell proliferation
• Resistance:  uptake by cytosine permease,  conversion to active nucleoside analog by
cytosine deaminase,  conversion to toxic nucleotides, upregulated pyrimidine synthesis
• Narrow spectrumoral only, high concentrations in CNSalways used in combination with
another antifungalbone marrow toxicity
Azoles (ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, voriconazole, isavuconazole, posaconazole)
• Inhibit lanosterol 14-α-demethylase →  ergosterol synthesis in cell membrane → reduces
membrane permeability, structural integrity, and impairs function
• Resistance: ERG11 mutations, efflux pumps
• Broad spectrum (in general) topical treatment of superficial infection, oral/IV systemic infections
• serum liver enzymes/hepatoxicity, QT prolongation, CYP interactions
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Key points: Targets and Drug Classes
Echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, anadulafungin): Inhibit β-1,3-D-glucan → weakened cell
wall → osmotic influx of water → cell swells → cell ruptures (lysis)
• Narrow spectrum: Candida spp, Aspergillus IV, poor CNS penetrationlow toxicity, few DDIs
Terbinafine: Inhibits squalene epoxidase (an early step in ergosterol synthesis) → reduces
membrane permeability, structural integrity, and impairs function
• Resistance is rising: mutations in squalene epoxidase gene, efflux pumps
• Topical use for tinea, cutaneous candidiasissystemically for fungal nail infections
(onychomycosis)
• GI discomfort, headache, hepatoxicity, rashCYP2D6 inhibitor, moderate potential for drug
interactions
Griseofulvin: Binds microtubules in keratin precursor cells → disrupts the mitotic spindle → inhibits
fungal cell mitosis
• Resistance: altered microtubule structure, decreased uptake of drug
• Narrow spectrum: tinea infections only (skin, hair, nails)
• Orallong duration of treatmentGI upset, headache,  serum liver enzymescontraindicated
in pregnancy
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
From: 33 Antifungal Drugs
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e, 2023
Exist as molds in the environment
and yeasts in the human body
Legend:
Common pathogenic organisms of Kingdom Fungi.
Date of download: 7/17/2023 Copyright © Wolters Kluwer
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Clinical response to antifungal treatment can be protracted because fungi are
complex slow-growing organisms with thick walls often embedded in tissues.
Opportunistic fungal pathogens Endemic fungal pathogens
• Candida spp. • Blastomyces: Midwest, south-central,
southeastern regions
• Aspergillus spp.
• Cryptococcus neoformans • Coccidioides: Southwestern US
• Pneumocystis jirovecii • Histoplasma: Ohio and Mississippi
River valleys
• Mucorales order
− Rhizopus • Paracoccidioides: South America
The most common
− Mucor
causes of human • Sporothrix: worldwide
− Rhizomucor
infections in this group
• others
− and other species
❖ Opportunistic fungi are usually residents of the human microbiota or saprophytes in the environment. Candida and
Aspergillus are the most common infections. Immunodeficient patients are at highest risk of opportunistic infection.
❖ Endemic fungi are not part of the normal human microbiome. Infection can result from inhalation of spores.
(Sporothrix is through skin contact typically.) People who live in or travel to geographic areas where certain fungi
are endemic are at risk for these infections. Weakened immune system or chronic lung disease increases the risk
of endemic infection.
❖ The incidence of fungal infections is rising. Morbidity in immunocompromised patients is high.
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Ergosterol is the primary
fungal cell membrane sterol.
Cholesterol is the primary
human cell membrane sterol.
Drug targets
Cell membrane: Ergosterol
• Amphotericin B (polyenes)
• Azoles
• Terbinafine
Cell-wall: -glucans
• Echinocandins
Nucleic acid synthesis
• Flucytosine
Targets of antifungal drugs. Except for flucytosine and griseofulvin (not
Microtubules
shown), all currently available antifungals target the fungal cell membrane
• Griseofulvin
or cell wall.
Citation: Chapter 48 Antifungal Agents, Katzung BG, Kruidering-Hall M, Tuan R, Vanderah TW, Trevor AJ. Katzung & Trevor's Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 13e;
2021, Figure 48-1. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3058&sectionid=255307290 Accessed: November 19, 2021
Slide adapted by LG
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Mechanisms of Resistance to Antifungal Agents
• Usually develops slowly
• Fungal cells do not transfer genes among or between species, and they do not express
enzymes that inactivate antifungal agents.
The clinically important mechanisms of antifungal drug resistance are:
1. Target protein alterations due to genetic mutations that reduce binding affinity
2. Expression of efflux pumps that actively transport drug out of the fungal cell
Mechanisms vary according to the subclass of antifungal drugs.
• Candida albicans resistance mechanisms are the most studied.
• Less is known about Aspergillus and C. neoformans resistance mechanisms.
• Almost no information on resistance mechanisms of other pathogenic fungi is available.
12
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Amphotericin B
an amphipathic, amphoteric polyene macrolide
obtained from the
bacterium Streptomyces nodosus
Broad spectrum, fungicidal
Hydroxyl-rich side – polar – associates with water molecules
Polyene side – nonpolar – avid association with ergosterol
• polyene: a hydrocarbon with several carbon–carbon double bonds, especially one having
a chain of alternating single and double bonds
• amphipathic: the molecule has both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions
• amphoteric: the molecule can act as either and acid or base 13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Pharmacokinetics of Amphotericin B Formulations
TAKEAWAYS: IV only, highly protein bound, high concentration in tissues, poor penetration into
CNS, slow elimination, cleared primarily by kidneys, long terminal half-life
Lipid / liposomal formulations decrease accumulation in kidney tissue → lower nephrotoxicity
which allows higher dosing and improved tolerability
Conventional AMB deoxycholate AMB Liposomal / Lipid Complex
A I.V.; Intrathecal I.V.
D Amphotericin B is released from deoxycholate in the V increases with higher doses
d
bloodstream.
(increased uptake by tissues)
 Protein binding 90%
 Higher concentrations in liver, spleen, and lungs
 High concentrations in liver, spleen, kidney, bone marrow, than with conventional AMB
lung
o Higher concentration→ enhanced effect
 Lower but sufficient concentrations may be achieved
 Poor CNS penetration
inflamed pleura, synovium, and aqueous humor
 Poor CNS penetration even with inflamed meninges
H Not metabolized Not metabolized
Minor excretion in urine Minimal excretion in urine
No dosage adjustments provided for kidney or liver No dosage adjustments provided for kidney or liver
impairment impairment (not studied)
t½ Variable Initial: 15-48 hoursTerminal: 15 days Nonlinear kinetics:
t½ 100-173 hours following multiple doses
terminal
--- SLIDE 15 ---
TAKEAWAY: This slide and the next are to help you
Amphotericin B (AMB) Formulations conceptualize and understand AMB formulations.
They are NOT for memorization.
Conventional AMB
The efficacy of the different formulations
appears to be similar.
• Amphotericin B is formulated with sodium
deoxycholate (a bile salt), forming a
Conventional AMB (C-AMB)
•
colloidal suspension that enhances AMB’s
Liposomal AMB (L-AMB)
•
water solubility and stability
AMB lipid complex (ABLC)
•
Liposomal and Lipid Complex AMB
Liposomal AMB and AMB lipid complex:
• AMB binds the lipids in the
Infusion-related toxicity and nephrotoxicity
lipid vehicles.
AMB are reduced, which permits use of larger doses
• AMB affinity is between that compared to conventional AMB.
Lipid vehicle
for fungal ergosterol and for
AMB lipid formulations enhance delivery to the
human cholesterol
site of infection while minimizing organ toxicity.
• The liposomes preferentially attach to the
Higher doses can improve effectiveness,
fungal cell wall.
particularly in severe or resistant fungal
• The active AMB molecule is released and
infections.
transfers to the cell membrane where it can
15
exert its activity that leads to cell death. Figure: https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/11894710-delivery-truck-icon-clipart-in-
animated-caartoon-vector-illustration
--- SLIDE 16 ---
The putative structure of lipid-based
formulations of AmB. (By Figdraw).
• AmB lipid complex (ABLC) has ribbon-like
structures and consists of AmB complexed
with two lipids (dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine and
dimyristoylphosphatidylglycerol, with a molar ratio of
7:3) in a 1:1 drug-to-lipid molar ratio.
• Liposomal AmB (L-AmB) is a single bilayer
liposomal drug delivery system that consists
of a mixture of specific proportions of
amphophilic substances (e.g., phospholipids
and cholesterol) to form closed spherical
vesicles.
• AmB deoxycholate consists of amphotericin
B complexed with deoxycholate, a bile salt,
forming a micellar suspension to enhance
solubility.
Figure - available from: Journal of Neurology
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-putative-structure-of-lipid-based-formulations-of-
AmB-By-Figdraw-a-AmB-lipid_fig4_377811114
Figure micelle: Wikipedia By SuperManu - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0, 16
Slide adapted by LG
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=2902736
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Amphotericin B Antifungal Action
The amphipathic characteristic facilitates AMB’s avid combination with ergosterol in the fungal cell membrane
along the double bond-rich side of the drug’s structure and associates with molecules of the polar heads along
the hydroxyl-rich side. The amphoteric property (acid/base) enhances binding to ergosterol and helps to
sequester ergosterol, further destabilizing the cell membrane.
(1)
AMB associates with
ergosterol in fungal membrane

forms pores

Ions and other small molecules
leak out
plus
(2) Ergosterol is sequestered further
compromising membrane integrity

https://drfungus.org/knowledge-base/antifungal-pharmacology/
fungal cell death
Acquired Resistance (very rare)
• Mutations in various ERG genes likely reduces ergosterol concentration in
Relative selectivity:
the cell membrane of resistant isolates → reduces susceptibility to AMB.
AMB binds human membrane sterols,
• Replacement of ergosterol with precursor sterols → reduces susceptibility
but less avidly than to ergosterol.
to AMB.
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Amphotericin B Therapeutic Uses
Aspergillosis Mucormycosis
• Pulmonary • Rhino-orbital-cerebral and pulmonary
infections
• Extrapulmonary
• High mortality rates
• Febrile neutropenia
Cryptococcal meningitis (C. neoformans)
• Allogeneic bone marrow transplant
Candidiasis, deeply invasive
• Ocular (intraocular admin)
Some species of Aspergillus, Candida, Scedasporium, Fusarium, and causes of chromoblastomycosis are intrinsically resistant.
AMB is primarily for treatment of patients with progressive and potentially life-threatening
fungal infections.
AMB should not be used to treat noninvasive forms of fungal disease such as oral thrush,
vaginal candidiasis, and esophageal candidiasis in patients with normal neutrophil counts.
Pregnancy: AMB crosses the placenta and may be found in fetal circulation.
AMB is recommended for treatment of serious fungal infections in pregnancy.
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Aspergillusand Mucorin tissue.
A: Aspergillushas septate hyphae with V-
shaped branching.
B: Mucorhas nonseptate hyphae with
right-angle branching.
Figure 50-9
Aspergillus fumigatus—septate hyphae. Long arrow points to the septate hyphae of Aspergillus. Note the straight
parallel cell walls of this mold. Short arrow points to the typical low-angle, Y-shaped branching. (Used with
permission of Prof. Henry Sanchez, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine.) Figure 50-10
Citation: Opportunistic Mycoses, Levinson W, Chin-Hong P, Joyce EA, Nussbaum J, Schwartz B. Review of Medical Microbiology & Immunology: A Guide to Clinical Infectious
Diseases, 15e; 2018. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/ViewLarge.aspx?figid=208185545&gbosContainerID=0&gbosid=0&groupID=0 Accessed: October 30,
19
2019
Copyright © 2019 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 20 ---
20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW:
Example of Antifungal Treatment Regimen:
Induction, Consolidation, Maintenance,
Treatment of Cryptococcal Meningitis
the drugs being used and why
Amphotericin B: First-line in combination with flucytosine (patients with or without AIDS)
Liposomal AMB or AMB lipid complex I.V. 1x daily
PLUS
Flucytosine (oral) q6h x 2-4 wks or until afebrile and CSF cultures are negative
INDUCTION
− Monitor / manage intracranial pressure
phase
− For HIV/AIDS patients, deferring ART for 5 weeks after initiation of therapy
significantly improved survival compared to starting ART during the first 2
weeks.
ART=Antiretroviral therapy
CONSOLIDATION
Fluconazole 400-800 mg 1x daily for 8 weeks (non-AIDS) / 10 weeks (AIDS)
phase
MAINTENANCE Fluconazole 200mg 1x daily to prevent relapse 6-12 months (non-AIDS)
phase ‒ For HIV/AIDS patients, discontinuation of therapy may be considered in
(suppression) patients who remain asymptomatic, with CD4 cell count >100 cells/mm3 on ART
The Sanford Guide to Antimicrobial Therapy, 52e, 2022; Table 11A (6): Cryptococcosis (IDSA Guideline: CID 50:291; 2010
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
(a)T2-weighted MR image of a
patient with cryptococcal meningitis
with bilateral infarctions in the
caudate nuclei (white arrows).
(b) T1- weighted MR image of a
patient with toxoplasmosis.
Arrows illustrate the frank lesions as
well as edema (dark hypointense
area surrounding the bright ringed
lesion) resulting from injury.
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/aT2-weighted-MR-image-of-a-patient-with-cryptococcal-meningitis-with-bilateral_fig3_49792340
22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Cryptococcus neoformans seen as encapsulated Cryptococcal meningitis.
yeast on India ink preparation of the CSF from an
This high-power photomicrograph of the
HIV patient with cryptococcal meningitis.
meninges, stained with mucicarmine, highlights
encapsulated and budding yeast forms.
The capsule of Cryptococcus neoformans stains
with mucicarmine (arrows).
The Atlas of Emergency Medicine, 3e, 2010; Figure 20-17
Pathology, The Big Picture Figure, 2008; Figure 11-24
(Photo contributor: Seth W. Wright, MD.)
(Photo contributor: Seth W. Wright, MD.)
23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Amphotericin B Toxicities
AMB therapy is often limited by toxicity, especially drug-induced renal impairment.
➢ AMB lipid formulations reduce infusion reactions and nephrotoxicity.
Toxicity Comments
Nephrotoxicity Azotemia High serum levels of nitrogenous wastes products
occurs in nearly all patients.
Acute kidney injury  renal perfusion →  glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
Renal tubular acidosis K+ and Mg2+ wasting occur
Hydration with normal saline infusions is recommended.
Hematologic • Anemia  erythropoietin production (by specialized kidney cells)
Infusion-related • Fever, chills, rigor, vomiting, headache, malaise, hypotension, tachypnea
• Thrombophlebitis
• Premedication with acetaminophen, antihistamine, glucocortoicoid, meperidine
may be helpful.
Intrathecal • Headache, fever common; arachnoiditis, delirium, seizures possible
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the advantages of liposomal AMB and AMB lipid complex compared to AMB deoxycholate?
• Infusion-related toxicity and nephrotoxicity are reduced, which permits use of larger doses
compared to conventional AMB.
• AMB lipid formulations enhance delivery to the site of infection while reducing organ toxicity.
• Higher doses can improve effectiveness, particularly in severe or resistant fungal infections.
What is AMB’s mechanism of antifungal action?
• AMB associates with ergosterol in fungal membrane causing pores to form. Cations and other small
molecules leak out.
• Ergosterol is sequestered further compromising membrane integrity, leading to fungal cell death.
What are the toxicities associated with AMB administration?
• Infusion reactions, nephrotoxicity (azotemia, acute kidney injury, renal tubular acidosis), and anemia
(impaired EPO synthesis)
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Check your knowledge
What physical properties of the amphotericin B molecule are probably important for its fungus-killing activity?
• The amphipathic property allows the drug to interact with both hydrophilic polar head groups of the cell
membrane and hydrophobic membrane core and ergosterol embedded in the membrane.
• The amphoteric property (acid and base functional groups) enhances binding to ergosterol and helps to
sequester ergosterol, further destabilizing the cell membrane.
What accounts for its relatively selective toxicity against fungi?
• AMB affinity for ergosterol in fungal membranes is many time greater than its affinity for cholesterol in
mammalian membranes.
What are the likely mechanisms of resistance?
• Reduced concentrations of ergosterol due to mutations in various ERG genes or replacement with sterol
precursors. Resistance to AMB is rare.
AMB is an important therapeutic for what patients and infections?
• AMB is primarily for treatment of patients with progressive and potentially life-threatening fungal
infections.
• AMB should not be used to treat noninvasive forms of fungal disease such as oral thrush, vaginal
candidiasis, and esophageal candidiasis in patients with normal neutrophil counts.
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Flucytosine (5-FC)
fluorinated pyrimidine analog
converted to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in fungal cells
Cytosine Uracil
5-FC 5-FU
Flucytosine
27
Deamination of 5-FC: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deamination_5-Fluorocytosine_to_5-Fluorouracil.svg
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Flucytosine (5-FC) Pharmacokinetics
PK Oral (prodrug); rapid, good absorption, bioavailability ~90%, good CSF penetration, intracellular
deamination in yeasts and certain gut bacteria to active 5-FU; urine excretion of 5-FC (renal dosing
adjustments are necessary); t½ 3-6h, up to 200h in renal failure; admin q6h
• AMB is nephrotoxic
MOA Inhibits RNA and DNA synthesis (See next slide.) in many patients.
Resistance emerges rapidly during therapy when the drug is used alone.
• 5-FC dose must be
• Loss of cytosine permease transporter
adjusted in renal
•  Cytosine deaminase activity or uPRT activity
insufficiency.
• 5-FC toxicities are
Activity Fungistatic
concentration-
Narrow spectrum: Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida some species, most fungi that
dependent.
cause chromoblastomycosis, and some dematiaceous (darkly pigmented) fungi
Uses Cryptococcus meningitis and selected invasive candidiasis
5-FC has additive or synergistic effect with AMB (in vitro testing).
AE Well tolerated when renal function is normal
Certain bacteria in the
Concentration-dependent adverse effects:
gut microbiome
• Heme: leukopenia, thrombocytopenia
convert 5-FC to 5-FU,
• Liver: elevated liver function enzymes (AST/ALT); liver necrosis reported which is absorbed and
• GI: nausea, vomiting diarrhea can cause host cell
toxicity.
Pregnancy: adverse events seen in animal reproduction studies 28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Flucytosine Mechanism of Action
• Entry: fungal cell uptake via cytosine permeases
• Activation: Deamination in fungal cell to 5-FC → 5-FU 5-FC
uPRT
Antifungal action: Activation by cellular kinases
1. RNA: 5-FUTP incorporation into RNA → reduces RNA synthesis
and, therefore, protein synthesis
2. DNA: 5-FUMP → 5-FdUMP → potent thymidylate synthase inhibition
→ reduces DNA synthesis
Selectivity for fungal cell:
Human cells lack cytosine permease, cytosine deaminase, and uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase (uPRT) activity.
Left figure: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Metabolism-of-flucytosine-The-prodrug-gets-converted-to-5-fluorouracil-by-the-fungal_fig7_369346867
29
Right figure: Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 14e, 2023; Chapter 61: Antifungal Agents (Figure 61-3)
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the basis of flucytosine’s selectivity?
• Mammalian cells cannot activate 5-FC as they do not have cytosine permease or cytosine
deaminase.
What is the basis of flucytosine’s toxicity?
• Intracellular conversion to toxic 5-FU in fungal cell
How does flucytosine induce cellular cytotoxicity?
• 5-FUTP incorporation of FUTP into RNA → RNA synthesis
• 5-FdUMP inhibits thymidylate synthase →  DNA synthesis
What are the therapeutic uses of 5-FC and why?
• Narrow spectrum of activity
• Cryptococcal meningitis with AMB and selected invasive candidiasis with AMB.
• Oral, crosses BBB; rapid development of resistance when used alone
What are major adverse effects of 5-FC and how can they be reduced?
• Well tolerated when renal function is normal – Adverse effects are concentration-dependent
• Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia / elevated liver function enzymes (AST/ALT) / nausea, vomiting
diarrhea
• Monitor renal function
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Azole
Antifungals
Azoles
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Azole Antifungal Agents
Broad spectrum of activity  Fungistatic
Some azoles appear to fungicidal against Aspergillus spp.
For Systemic Use Topical Products
Itraconazole Clotrimazole
s
Fluconazole
Ketoconazole
e
l
o • Butoconazole
Voriconazole
z
I
a • Miconazole m
i Posiconazole
r
i
T • Econazole d
a
Isavuconazole
(Prodrug: Isavuconazonium)
• Luliconazole z
o
Oteseconazole l
• Oxiconazole e
s
Oteseconazole is a tetrazole antifungal drug for oral
• Sertaconazole
treatment of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis.
• Sulconazole
Ketoconazole
• Tiaconazole
Because of its toxicity, oral ketoconazole has been
• Terconazole
replaced by systemic triazole antifungals.
• Efinaconazole
32
--- SLIDE 33 ---
TAKEAWAYS: Low protein binding → diffusion across BBB.
Pharmacokinetics of Azole Antifungal Agents Bioavailability and t½ vary. Extensive hepatic metabolism (most
drugs). Inhibition of CYP3A4 (and others).
Route CSF Elimination / substrate t Drug
1/2
Bioavailability Penetration CYP inhibition (hours) Interactions
Itraconazole Oral No Hepatic / CYP3A4 24-42
H
i
Variable* CYP3A4, P-gp
g
h
Fluconazole Oral, IV Yes Renal / minor hepatic 22-31
p
o
>90% ~80% unchanged (urine)
t
e
CYP2C19, 2C9, 3A4 n
t
i
Voriconazole Oral, IV Yes Hepatic CYP2C19, 2C9, 3A4 6 a
l
f
96% CYP3A4, 2C9
o
r
Posaconazole Oral, IV No Minimal (~17% by UGT) 25 d
r
u
Variable* excreted unchanged (feces)
g
CYP3A4, P-gp i
n
t
Isavuconazole Oral, IV limited Hepatic / CYP3A4, UGT 130 e
r
a
98% data CYP3A4, P-gp
c
t
i
Ketoconazole Oral No Hepatic 7-10 o
n
Variable* CYP3A4, P-gp s
*Itraconazole, Posaconazole, Ketoconazole: acid environment for optimal absorption
33
Bold: strong inhibitors
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Azole antifungal action:
Inhibition of 14--demethylase inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis
14- demethylase (CYP51) is an enzyme expressed by ERG11 gene.
Azole antifungals bind the iron in the heme group.
heme
squalene → → lanosterol 14-α-demethylase →… → ergosterol
Resistance:
azole antifungals
1. Modifications of target enzymes
Mutation in ERG11 gene →  binding of
the azole to 14-α-demethylase and
Azole antifungals block conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol,
which decreases ergosterol concentration in fungal cell allows access of the natural substrate,
membranes, inhibiting cell membrane formation lanosterol (observed in C. albicans).
and
2. Efflux pumps transport the azole out
Accumulation of toxic 14-methylated sterols (intermediates) disrupts
of the fungal cell.
the integrity and function of the fungal cell membrane.
3.  Production of lanosterol, which
outcompetes the drug at the catalytic
growth arrest
site.
At high concentrations, as can be achieved with topical application,
some azoles directly increase fungal plasma membrane
permeability.
34
Figure: https://creation.com/cells-heme
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Summary of azole antifungals spectrums of activity (susceptible fungi)
Itraconazole Fluconazole Voriconazole Posaconazole Isavuconazole
Aspergillosus ✓ ⎯ ✓ ✓ ✓
Candidiasis ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
C. neoformans ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Mucormycosis ⎯ ⎯ ⎯ ✓ ✓
Dimorphic fungi ✓  ✓  
Onychomycosis ✓    
Tinea ✓ ✓   
⎯ No activity
 Less effective for these fungal infections than other options.
 Effective but reserved for infections that can’t be treated with standard therapy.
Tinea = Dermatophytosis
TAKEAWAY: The spectrum of action directly influences usefulness in treatment specific infections.
Remember to think about risks of resistance and adverse effects for the individual patient. 35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
TAKEAWAYS:
Azole Antifungals Therapeutic Uses (susceptible fungi)
Spectrums of action→uses, drug of choice, CNS penetration
Itraconazole Fluconazole Voriconazole Posaconazole Isavuconazole
Broadest spectrums of the azole antifungals.
Good CNS Good CNS
Broad spectrum Generally reserved for patients refractory to or
penetration penetration
intolerant of first-line drugs.
Drug or choice for Initial choice for Drug of choice for Treatment of invasive Treatment of
dimorphic fungi • Cryptococcal invasive infections infections invasive infections
• Blastomycosis meningitis • Aspergillosis • Aspergillosis • Aspergillosis
• Sporotrichosis consolidation and • Candidemia, • Mucormycosis, oral • Mucormycosis
• Histoplasmosis maintenance including step down therapy Alternative for
• Coccidiomycosis phases fluconazole-resistant • Oropharyngeal • Cryptococcal
• Paracoccidioidomycosis • Candidemia • Disseminated candidiasis meningitis
• Mucocutaneous Candida infections • Salvage therapy for (maintenance and
Alternative for:
candidiasis • Cryptococcal invasive fungal consolidation)
• Onychomycosis
• Coccidioidomycosis meningitis infections ISA penetrates brain
(second to terbinafine)
(alternative for parenchyma.
• Tinea infections
fluconazole)
• Esophageal
No activity against
refractory to topical
• Serious infections by candidiasis
aspergillosis or
antifungal treatment
dimorphic fungi
mucormycosis
• Aspergillosis Posaconazole and isavuconazole are the only
• Candidasis azoles with in vitro activity against Mucorales.
Itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole and isavuconazole are also used for prophylaxis of invasive fungal infections in
36
hematologic malignancy, hematopoietic stem cell transplant, and solid organ transplant patients.
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Azole antifungals: Class adverse effects
Monitor for signs and symptoms; Monitor blood levels as appropriate.
System Class effects unless otherwise indicated (not a complete list)
GI The most common side effect: Nausea, abdominal pain
Hepatotoxicity Ranges from asymptomatic increase in serum hepatic enzymes (AST/ALT) to liver failure (rare)
Cardiac Prolongation of QT interval → torsades de pointes → ventricular arrhythmias.
Peripheral neuropathy Most common with itraconazole
Neurological
Voriconazole and posaconazole
Onset: 1 to 18 months Also occurs with voriconazole and posaconazole
IV formulated with cyclodextrin
Immediate: urticaria, angioedema, anaphylactic shock
can accumulate in renal
Hypersensitivity Delayed: Range from rash to severe cutaneous reactions (SJS/TENS)
insufficiency and acute kidney
reactions Serum sickness, and others
injury.
Photosensitivity
Pregnancy Avoid – may cause fetal harm. Use only if benefit to mother outweighs risk to fetus.
Drug interactions • CYP3A4-related: Co-administration with many drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 is
High potential contraindicated.
• QT interval prolongation: Drugs that prolong QT interval or patients with long QT syndrome may
cause torsades de pointes (ventricular arrhythmias)
• pH-related: Ketoconazole, itraconazole caps, posaconazole require acidic environment (with food
37
or acidic carbonated beverage, eg, ginger ale); some should be taken on an empty stomach.
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Azole antifungals: Drug-specific adverse effects
Itraconazole • Congestive heart failure Itraconazole is contraindicated in patients with heart failure.
Voriconazole • Ophthalmic effects: Blurred vision, optic neuritis, vision color changes, scleritis
• Peripheral neuropathy reported: May be rapid, debilitating, irreversible
• Encephalopathy, hallucinations may occur with IV administration (high concentrations)
• Periosteal disease: Voriconazole is trifluorinated; F− is integrated into extracellular matrix.
Metabolic-related effects: Proposed mechanisms
Adrenal suppression
• Ketoconazole: strong inhibitor of steroidogenesis
• Itraconazole and posaconazole: Effects on steroidogenesis are milder and occur less frequently.
Inhibition of 17-alpha hydroxylase (CYP17) and C17,20 desmolase suppresses steroidogenesis.
• Suppression of androgen synthesis leads to oligospermia, gynecomastia, menstrual irregularities (estrogens are
derived from androgens), and decreased libido.
Inhibition of 11- hydroxylase (CYP11A1) decreases glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid synthesis.
• Cortisol and aldosterone synthesis are suppressed
Pseudohyperaldosteronism with hypertension and hypokalemia:
Itraconazole and posaconazole: More frequently observed
Azoles may inhibit the enzyme that inactivates cortisol, 11--hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, which is found in
aldosterone-sensitive tissues.
Like aldosterone, cortisol activates mineralocorticoid receptors → sodium and water reabsorption, which raises blood
pressure, and causes potassium loss.
38
Fluconazole, voriconazole, isavuconazole: Low potential for adrenal suppression and pseudohyperaldosteronism.
--- SLIDE 39 ---
➢ When prescribing oral azole antifungal therapy, certain precautions should be
considered and recommendations should be made to the patient.
1. The patient’s concomitant drugs and comorbid conditions in view of the high potential for
drug interactions.
2. The patient’s risk of ventricular fibrillation in view of the drug’s QT interval prolonging effects.
3. Food?: Take with food (for gastric acidity) or take on empty stomach?
4. Patient education about the symptoms and signs of potential side effects (class and drug-
specific effects) and hypersensitivity reactions.
5. The importance of monitoring: liver function studies and therapeutic drug levels as
appropriate.
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Check your knowledge
Which drug is first line for treatment of fungal infections by dimorphic fungi?
• Itraconazole
Which drug is first line for consolidation and maintenance of cryptococcal meningitis?
• Fluconazole
• Alternatives are voriconalzole, posaconazole and isavuconazole (isavuconozium is the prodrug).
• Initial therapy regimen is amphotericin B + flucytosine
Which drug is the preferred initial treatment for invasive aspergillosis?
• Voriconazole
Which drug is an alternative for the initial treatment of invasive aspergillosis in a patient with optic neuritis or
peripheral neuropathy?
• Posaconazole or isavuconazole and they are better tolerated than voriconazole.
• Voriconazole can cause ocular, neurological, and severe dermatologic toxicities.
Which drugs are used as step-down therapy for mucormycosis?
• Posaconazole and isavuconazole
• Amphotericin B is the preferred initial therapy.
Which oral drug is first line for vulvovaginal candidiasis?
• Fluconazole 40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
Check your knowledge
What adverse effects can occur with all of the azole antifungals?
• Minor GI disturbances (eg nausea, diarrhea);  serum aminotransferases (hepatic enzymes), hepatitis
(rare); prolongation of QT interval; TdP/ventricular arrhythmias; metabolic-related hypokalemia,
pseudoaldosteronisms and hypertension; immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions
Which azole antifungal should be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure?
• Itraconazole has negative inotropic effects (reduced force of contraction) and can worsen heart failure
AND it is associated with new heart failure and with new and worsening hypertension. Metabolic-related
effects observed more often than with other triazoles – except posaconazole.
Which azole antifungal is associated with optic neuritis and other ocular toxicities?
• Voriconazole: Optic neuritis, scleritis, episcleritis, photophobia
Which azole antifungal is associated with peripheral neuropathy?
• Voriconazole: Numbness and tingling in the extremities may be rapidly debilitating and irreversible.
Encphalopathy is reported.
Which azole antifungal is most likely to interfere with steroidogenesis?
• Ketoconazole, an imidazole antifungal that is currently used only topically, has a high risk of adrenal
suppression due to its strong inhibition of steroidogenesis.
• Itraconazole and posaconazole have a moderate risk of adrenal suppression.
• FYI: Cortisol, aldosterone, and the androgen precursors of sex hormones, dehydroepiandrostenedione
(DHEA) and DHEA sulfate are synthesized in the adrenal cortex. 41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the major mechanism of drug interactions with the azole antifungal drugs?
• CYP inhibition. All azole antifungals are strong CYP3A4 inhibitors, except fluconazole and isavuconazole,
which both inhibit CYP3A4 but with moderate affinity for the enzyme.
One of the azole antifungals is cleared renally and excreted unchanged in urine. Which one? What do we
need to think about in terms of dosing this drug?
• Fluconazole, 80% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
• Dosage adjustment for patients with renal insufficiency.
• Note: Fluconazole is a strong inhibitor of CYP2C19 and inhibit CYP2C9 and 3A4 with lower affinity.
Two triazole antifungal drugs are formulated with cyclodextrin to solubilize the hydrophobic drugs for
intravenous administration. What toxicity can occur in patients with renal insufficiency? What are the two
drugs?
• Accumulation of cyclodextrin in patients with renal insufficiency can cause toxicity to the kidney tubular
cells. The drugs are voriconazole and posaconazole.
One of the antifungals in this group does not require dosage adjustment for patients with renal insufficiency
or liver impairment. What is it? Why are dosage adjustments not required?
• The drug is posaconazole because it is minimally metabolized (~17% by UGT) by the liver, excreted
unchanged in the feces, and is not cleared through the kidney.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
Echinocandins
-1,3-glucan synthase inhibitors
Caspofungin
Micafungin
Anidulafungin
Rezafungin
Echinocandins
large cyclic peptides linked
to long-chain fatty acid
43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
Echinocandins Pharmacokinetics Class Properties
HERE IS HOW TO STATE THE PK PROPERTIES:
IV only, highly protein bound, extensive tissue distribution but poor CNS penetration, slow hepatic non-
CYP metabolism, excreted in feces with very little renal clearance → renal dosing adjustment not needed,
drug-specific half-life
Echinocandins
A I.V. only
D plasma albumin binding (>97%)
extensive tissue distribution but poor distribution to CSF
M extensive non-CYP metabolism and spontaneous degradation
to amino acid components
E urine / feces primarily as metabolites
Dose adjustment for renal impairment not required.
t½ Caspofungin…. 9-11 h, non-linear elimination kinetics
Micafungin….... 11-15 h, linear elimination
Anidulafungin.. 24-48 h, linear elimination
Rezafungin…… ave ~150 h (once weekly dosing), linear elim.
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Weakens cell wall → osmotic influx of
Echinocandins are noncompetitive inhibitors of -1,3-glucan synthase.
water → cells swells → rupture
This action disrupts the rigidity, structural
integrity, and function of the fungal cell wall,
causing cell death.
Activity:
• Narrow spectrum
• Candida (fungicidal)
active against azole-resistant Candida spp.
• Aspergillus (fungistatic)
Resistance (Candida): rare to date
Mutation in FKS1/2 gene encoding a protein in
the glucan synthase complex →  affinity for
the drugs.
The fungal cell wall and membrane and the action of echinocandins. The strength of the fungal cell wall is maintained by fibrillar
polysaccharides, largely β-1,3-glucan and chitin, which bind covalently to each other and to proteins. A glucan synthase complex in the
plasma membrane catalyzes the synthesis of β-1,3-glucan; the glucan is extruded into the periplasm and incorporated into the cell wall.
Echinocandins inhibit the activity of the glucan synthase complex, resulting in loss of the structural integrity of the cell wall. The Fks1p
subunit of glucan synthase appears to be the target of echinocandins, and mutations in Fks1p cause resistance to echinocandins.
Citation: Chapter 61 Antifungal Agents, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 13e; 2017, Figure 61-5.
Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172485840 Accessed: November 19, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 46 ---
Adverse Effects
Caspofungin Therapeutic Uses: Serious Infections
Generally well tolerated
diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain
Invasive
Candidemia Neutropenic − Phlebitis at infusion site
Drug Aspergillosis Prophylaxis*
(fungicidal) fever − Histamine-mediated effects: flushing,
(fungistatic)
urticaria, hypotension
− Hepatic impairment: LFTs; hepatitis
Caspofungin
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ reported.
adults / peds
− Cardiotoxicity – low rates reported
Micafungin
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Pregnancy: May cause fetal harm, based on
adults / peds
animal reproduction studies: weigh
risk/benefit
Anidulafungin
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
adults / peds Drug interactions: Monitor therapy
• Caspofungin + Cyclosporine → may 
Rezafungin effective but
✓
each other’s levels → may  toxicity of
adults not approved
each
*Prophylaxis against invasive fungal infections
• Rifampin and other inducers of clearance
Patients at risk for invasive fungal infections include acute leukemia
may increase caspofungin levels.
(neutropenia and intensive induction therapy) and hematopoietic stem
• Micafungin + Sirolimus → sirolimus levels
cell transplantation.
• All of them may decrease therapeutic
effects of Saccharomyces boulardii
probiotic yeast supplement for tx of
antibiotic-associated C. difficile diarrhea.
46
--- SLIDE 47 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the fungal cell target of the echinocandins?
• They inhibit -1,3-glucan synthase complex, which disrupts the integrity of the fungal cell wall, leading to
cell death.
What is the spectrum of action of echinocandins?
• Candida spp (fungicidal); Aspergillosus spp (fungistatic)
What is the clinical importance of the echinocandins?
• Treatment and prophylaxis of serious Candida infections; treatment of invasive aspergillosis not
responsive to other drugs
What is the effect of drug interactions with concurrently administered drugs?
• Caspofungin and cyclosporine may increase plasma concentrations of each other increasing the risk of
hepatotoxicity (echinocandins) and nephrotoxicity (cyclosporine)
• Micafungin increases sirolimus levels increasing the risk of numerous toxicities.
• All may diminish the therapeutic effects of Sacharomyces boulardii, a beneficial yeast in the gut
microbiome.
• Ibrexafungerp: CYP3A4 inducers (avoid) and inhibitors (caution)
What are the recommendations for use of glucan synthase inhibitors in pregnancy?
• Echinocandins: Animal reproduction studies suggest the potential for fetal harm. Use only if benefit to the
mother outweighs the risk to the fetus.
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
Systemic Antifungal Drugs for
Mucocutaneous Infections
Griseofulvin
Terbinafine
Griseofulvin
Terbinafine
48
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Pharmacokinetics
Griseofulvin Terbinafine
• poor oral absorption → low bioavailability • well absorbed from GI tract
Absorption is improved with microsized and • 40% bioavailability (marked hepatic first-
ultramicrosized formulations and fatty food. pass effect)
• deposits in keratin precursor cells of • >99% plasma protein bound
skin, hair, nails
• accumulates in skin, nails, and fat
• concentrates in liver, fat, skeletal muscles
• Hepatic metabolism via several CYPs
• extensive hepatic metabolism
• t½ initial ~12 hours
• urine (metabolites) and feces
• t½ steady state 200-400 hrs
• t½ 9-24 hours
 not recommended in patients with marked
renal or hepatic impairment
49
--- SLIDE 50 ---
Griseofulvin accumulates in keratin ⎯Fungistatic⎯
Griseofulvin Treatment
Dermatophytoses (tinea) of
Binds keratin in keratin skin/scalp, hair, and nails
precursor cells
Treatment duration 6-18
months
Drug-keratin complex is taken up
by dermatophyte as
Terbinafine has replaced
hair/skin/nails are replaced
griseofulvin for the treatment
of onychomycosis.
Griseofulvin binds to
fungal tubulin
Interferes with
microtubule function
Inhibits fungal cell
mitosis at metaphase
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Terbinafine accumulates in keratin ⎯Fungicidal⎯
Inhibits squalene epoxidase
Terbinafine Treatment
Spectrum: Tinea and Candida
Drug of choice for
Prevents ergosterol Accumulation of toxic
synthesis amounts of squalene • onychomycosis (oral)
(more effective than griseofulvin and
itraconazole for fungal infections of
Squalene accumulation
Ergosterol depletion fingernails and toenails)
causes membrane
destabilizes
Treatment x3 months
dysfunction, osmotic
the membrane.
stress, impaired function • dermatophytoses (topical) and
• cutaneous candidiasis (topical)
Fungal cell death
51
--- SLIDE 52 ---
Adverse Effects and Drug Interactions
Griseofulvin Low incidence of serious Terbinafine Generally well tolerated
adverse effects
• GI effects, headache, rash
• Headache, GI upset
• Taste / smell disturbances
• Rash, photosensitivity
Rare but serious:
• Hypersensitivity reactions:
• Hepatotoxicity
rashes, serum sickness, hepatitis,
• Neutropenia
hematologic effects, lupus-like syndrome
• Hypersensitivity reactions
DDIs: CYP inducer
Rash, SJS/ TEN
•  Contraceptive levels → contraceptive
Drug interactions:
failure
• minor substrate of several CYPs
•  Warfarin levels
• strong inhibitor of CYP2D6
Contraindications:
Contraindications:
• Pregnancy (teratogenic)
• Chronic or active liver disease
• Hepatic failure
• Pregnancy (limited information)
• Porphyria
52
SJS: Stevens Johnson syndrome; TEN: toxic epidermal necrolysis
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Review: Compare and contrast griseofulvin and terbinafine.
ADME Oral, once daily Extensive hepatic metabolism
G: Take with fatty food Terminal t½:
G: 9-24 h; T: 200-400 h at steady state
Mechanism of G: binds microtubules in new keratin and prevents mitosis
action T: squalene epoxidase inhibitor reducing ergosterol synthesis
Therapeutic uses Dermatophyte infections
G: DOC for tinea capitis in children
DOC: drug of choice
T: DOC for onychomycosis
Adverse effects Both generally well tolerated
GI disturbances, hypersensitivity reactions
Drug interactions G: CYP inducer
T: Strong CYP2D6 inhibitor
Contraindications G: liver failure, porphyria, pregnancy
T: chronic or acute liver disease, avoid in pregnancy
53
--- SLIDE 54 ---
Topical Antifungal Therapy
There are numerous topical antifungal products. For your reference, they
are listed on the following slides.
• Creams, ointments, solutions, powders, vaginal suppositories
Topical antifungal are for the treatment of limited superficial infections of
skin and mucous membranes:
• Candidiasis, dermatophytoses (tinea), fungal keratitis
• Penetration into hyperkeratotic lesions is often poor.
• Numerous topical antifungals are available.
The products to know by name for this lecture are:
Azoles Non-Azoles
 Ketoconazole Nystatin
Clotrimazole Terbinafine
54
--- SLIDE 55 ---
Topical Antifungals Mechanisms of Action and Spectrums of Activity
Drug Mechanism of action Spectrum of activity
Nystatin – Polyene Binds ergosterol forming pores in the Candida only
plasma membrane
Azoles 14--demethylase inhibitors Fungistatic
C. albicans, Dermatophytes,
Malassezia furfur
(pityriasis versicolor)
Allylamines: Squalene epoxidase inhibitors Fungicidal
Terbinafine, Naftafine Dermatophytes
Benzylamine: Butenafine Malassezia furfur
Ciclopirox Chelates trivalent metal ions → inhibits Fungicidal
metal-dependent enzymes; also blocks C. albicans, Dermatophytes,
intracellular transport, which disrupts DNA, Malassezia furfur
RNA, protein synthesis
Tolnaftate Distorts the hyphae and stunts growth of Fungicidal
susceptible fungi; may involve inhibition of Dermatophytes
squalene epoxidase Malassezia furfur
Tavaborole Inhibits leucyl-tRNA synthase → protein Fungistatic
synthesis inhibitor Trichophyton 55
--- SLIDE 56 ---
Therapeutic Uses of Topical Antifungal Agents
Infection Azole Treatments Non-Azole Treatments
Oral candidiasis Clotrimazole troches (lozenge) Nystatin oral suspension
Miconazole buccal tablets  Swish and swallow, or swish and spit
 Dissolve in mouth  Paint mucous membranes of infant’s
(not chewed or swallowed) mouth
 Treatment and prophylaxis  Unpleasant taste even though it contains
 Pleasant-tasting sucrose
Vulvovaginal candidiasis, Vaginal creams and suppositories
uncomplicated Clotrimazole Terconazole Nystatin vaginal tablets
Miconazole Tioconazole (must be prepared by compounding
Butoconazole pharmacy)
Cutaneous Various products for diaper dermatitis and Nystatin cream for diaper dermatitis and
candidiasis intertrigo intertrigo
Dermatophyte and Malassezia Various azole products for Terbinafine Ciclopirox
infections, Trichophyton, Epidermophyton Naftafine Tolnaftate
cutaneous Tinea pedis / cruris / corporis / versicolor Butenafine
Onychomycosis Efinaconazole solution Ciclopirox lacquer
Tavaborole solution
Seborrheic dermatitis: Scalp: Ketoconazole shampoo Ciclopirox
Malassezia Non-scalp: various topical creams, gels, or Zinc pyrithione
foam Selenium sulfide
56
--- SLIDE 57 ---
Mild oral candidiasis treatments
Clotrimazole troche
Nystatin oral
(dissolve in mouth)
suspension
(swish and spit)
57
--- SLIDE 58 ---
Candida albicans—thrush in mouth. Note whitish plaques on tongue.
Review of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 13e > Opportunistic Mycoses Figure 50-4
58
(Photo Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD, and The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.)
--- SLIDE 59 ---
Summary of Antifungal Agents
59
--- SLIDE 60 ---
From: 33 Antifungal Drugs, Figure 33.3
Lippincott® Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e, 2022
Cellular targets of antifungal drugs.
Copyright © Wolters Kluwer
60
--- SLIDE 61 ---
Mycotic infections may involve the skin or subcutaneous tissues or may cause systemic infections.
Fungi are eukaryotic with rigid cell walls composed of chitin. Their membrane contains ergosterol, rather than
cholesterol. These structures are useful targets of drug therapy.
Amphotericin B (AMB):
• Broad spectrum of activity; fungicidal
• AMB is a polyene antibiotic binds ergosterol in fungal cell membrane causing pore formation and leakage
of cell components.
• Relative selectivity: Ergosterol has greater affinity for AMB than cholesterol has.
• Resistance is rare; possibly due to mutations in ERG gene or replacement of ergosterol with precursor
sterols.
• AMB is used for the treatment of serious systemic and CNS fungal infections, including during pregnancy.
• Nephrotoxicity and infusion reactions (fever, chills, tachypnea) limit its use.
Flucytosine (5-FC)
• Prodrug converted to cytotoxic antimetabolite, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which is activated by phosphorylation
and inhibits fungal RNA and DNA synthesis.
• Narrow spectrum of activity; fungistatic
• Resistance develops rapidly when it is used as a single agent, probably by reduced cytosine permease or
cytosine deaminase activity.
• 5-FC is an adjunct in the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis, and some invasive candidiasis
• Generally well tolerated. Concentration-dependent leukopenia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. Monitor renal
61
function.
--- SLIDE 62 ---
Azole antifungal agents: imidazoles and triazoles.
• Broad spectrum of activity, in general; fungistatic
• PK: Most are substrates and strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 and other CYPs.
• Mechanism: Competitive inhibitors of 14--demethylase (CYP51), blocking the conversion of lanosterol to
ergosterol leading to membrane instability and inhibits fungal cell growth.
• Resistance: ERG11 gene mutation, leading to decreased binding affinity of 14-α-demethylase and
decreased azole efficacy. Some fungal strains upregulate efflux pumps or increase production of
lanosterol.
• Triazoles are generally used for treatment of systemic and cutaneous mycoses, while imidazoles are
topical agents for cutaneous infections.
• QT interval prolongation is a potentially serious adverse effect of all azole antifungals. Other side effects
include GI disturbances and rash. There is a high risk of drug interactions.
Echinocandins
• Narrow spectrum; Candida spp (fungicidal), Aspergillus spp (fungistatic)
• Mechanism: Noncompetitive inhibition of -1,3-glucan synthase, which decreases cell wall synthesis.
• Resistance occurs by FKS-1 and FKS-2 alterations that result in decreased affinity for the echinocandins.
• The drugs are well tolerated. Flushing may occur. Caspofungin increases systemic concentrations of the
immunosuppressants cyclosporine and tacrolimus, and micafungin increases siroliumus levels. Cautious
use of the echinocandins is recommended in patients taking these immunosuppressants.
62
--- SLIDE 63 ---
Terbinafine
• Broad spectrum, fungicidal
• Mechanism: Noncompetitive inhibition of squalene epoxidase, which prevent ergosterol biosynthesis,
leading to cell death.
• Resistance is reported and linked to mutations in squalene epoxidase gene, SQLE
• Terbinafine accumulates in keratin-rich tissues and is more effective than griseofulvin in the treatment of
dermatophytoses of the nails, skin, and scalp; available for oral and topical use.
• Side effects include GI upset and headache. Terbinafine it is contraindicated in patients with chronic or
active hepatic disease. Terbinafine is a CYP substrate and CYP2D6 inhibitor.
Griseofulvin
• Narrow spectrum – dermatophytes; fungistatic
• Binds human keratin in skin, hair, and nails and causes disruption of the mitotic spindle and inhibition of
mitosis
• Treatment of dermytophytoses of the scalp and hair. It has been largely replaced by terbinafine for the
treatment of onychomycosis. Long duration of therapy – 6-18 months.
• Ultramicrosize griseofulvin is adequately absorbed and absorption is enhanced by fatty food.
• Side effects include GI upset, headache, rash, and photosensitivity, It is contraindicated in pregnancy
and patients with porphyria or hepatic failure.
63
--- SLIDE 64 ---
Topical antifungal agents
• A number of antifungal drugs are used topically for superficial infections caused by C. albicans and
dermatophytes.
• Preparations include oral suspension, oral troches, vaginal creams and suppositories, skin creams,
ointments, and powder.
Nystatin
• Polyene antibiotic that disrupts fungal membranes by binding to ergosterol.
• (Recall: Amphotericin B is a polyene antibiotic.)
• Topically to suppress local Candida infections, including mild oral-pharyngeal candidiasis (thrush)
• Orally for secondary prevention of fungal peritonitis in patients on peritoneal dialysis
• Nystatin is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
• Nephrotoxic (like AMB), therefore nystatin is not administered systemically.
Azole compounds:
• miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole, and several others and terbinafine topical products are used for
superficial tinea infections and mucocutaneous Candida infections.
Terbinafine, naftitine, butenafine: Squalene epoxidase inhibitors topically for tinea infection and cutaneous candidiasis
Tolnaftate: Distorts hyphae and stunts fungal growth for treatment of tinea infections
Ciclopirox: Inhibits transport or essential molecules and interferes with enzyme functions, DNA repair, and cell division
signals and structures.
Tavabarole: tRNA synthase inhibitor for treatment of onychomycosis. 64
--- SLIDE 65 ---
Dr. Aswant Kaur 65
--- SLIDE 66 ---
Check your knowledge
What are the advantages of liposomal AMB and AMB lipid complex compared to AMB deoxycholate?
• Infusion-related toxicity and nephrotoxicity are reduced, which permits use of larger doses
compared to conventional AMB.
• AMB lipid formulations enhance delivery to the site of infection while reducing organ toxicity.
• Higher doses can improve effectiveness, particularly in severe or resistant fungal infections.
What is AMB’s mechanism of antifungal action?
• AMB associates with ergosterol in fungal membrane causing pores to form. Cations and other small
molecules leak out.
• Ergosterol is sequestered further compromising membrane integrity, leading to fungal cell death.
What are the toxicities associated with AMB administration?
• Infusion reactions, nephrotoxicity (azotemia, acute kidney injury, renal tubular acidosis), and anemia
(impaired EPO synthesis)
66
--- SLIDE 67 ---
Check your knowledge
What physical properties of the amphotericin B molecule are probably important for its fungus-killing activity?
• The amphipathic property allows the drug to interact with both hydrophilic polar head groups of the cell
membrane and hydrophobic membrane core and ergosterol embedded in the membrane.
• The amphoteric property (acid and base functional groups) enhances binding to ergosterol and helps to
sequester ergosterol, further destabilizing the cell membrane.
What accounts for its relatively selective toxicity against fungi?
• AMB affinity for ergosterol in fungal membranes is many time greater than its affinity for cholesterol in
mammalian membranes.
• What are the likely mechanisms of resistance?
• Reduced concentrations of ergosterol due to mutations in various ERG genes or replacement with sterol
precursors. Resistance to AMB is rare.
AMB is an important therapeutic for what patients and infections?
• AMB is primarily for treatment of patients with progressive and potentially life-threatening fungal
infections.
• AMB should not be used to treat noninvasive forms of fungal disease such as oral thrush, vaginal
candidiasis, and esophageal candidiasis in patients with normal neutrophil counts.
67
--- SLIDE 68 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the basis of flucytosine’s selectivity?
• Mammalian cells cannot activate 5-FC as they do not have cytosine permease or cytosine
deaminase.
What is the basis of flucytosine’s toxicity?
• Intracellular conversion to toxic 5-FU in fungal cell
How does flucytosine induce cellular cytotoxicity?
• 5-FUTP incorporation of FUTP into RNA → RNA synthesis (thus, protein synthesis)
• 5-FdUMP inhibits thymidylate synthase →  DNA synthesis
What are the therapeutic uses of 5-FC and why?
• Narrow spectrum of activity
• Cryptococcal meningitis with AMB and selected invasive candidiasis with AMB.
• Oral, crosses BBB; rapid development of resistance when used alone
What are major adverse effects of 5-FC and how can they be reduced?
• Well tolerated when renal function is normal – Adverse effects are concentration-dependent
• Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia / elevated liver function enzymes (AST/ALT) / nausea, vomiting
diarrhea
• Monitor renal function
68
--- SLIDE 69 ---
Check your knowledge
Which drug is first line for treatment of fungal infections by dimorphic fungi?
• Itraconazole
Which drug is first line for consolidation and maintenance of cryptococcal meningitis?
• Fluconazole
• Alternatives are voriconalzole, posaconazole and isavuconazole (isavuconozium is the prodrug).
• Initial therapy regimen is amphotericin B + flucytosine
Which drug is the preferred initial treatment for invasive aspergillosis?
• Voriconazole
Which drug is an alternative for the initial treatment of invasive aspergillosis in a patient with optic neuritis or
peripheral neuropathy?
• Posaconazole or isavuconazole and they are better tolerated than voriconazole.
• Voriconazole can cause ocular, neurological, and severe dermatologic toxicities.
Which drugs are used as step-down therapy for mucormycosis?
• Posaconazole and isavuconazole
• Amphotericin B is the preferred initial therapy.
Which oral drug is first line for vulvovaginal candidiasis?
• Fluconazole 69
--- SLIDE 70 ---
Check your knowledge
What adverse effects can occur with all of the azole antifungals?
• Minor GI disturbances (eg nausea, diarrhea);  serum aminotransferases (hepatic enzymes), hepatitis
(rare); prolongation of QT interval; TdP/ventricular arrhythmias; metabolic-related hypokalemia,
pseudoaldosteronisms and hypertension; immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions
Which azole antifungal should be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure?
• Itraconazole has negative inotropic effects (reduced force of contraction) and can worsen heart failure
AND it is associated with new heart failure and with new and worsening hypertension. Metabolic-related
effects observed more often than with other triazoles – except posaconazole.
Which azole antifungal is associated with optic neuritis and other ocular toxicities?
• Voriconazole: Optic neuritis, scleritis, episcleritis, photophobia
Which azole antifungal is associated with peripheral neuropathy?
• Voriconazole: Numbness and tingling in the extremities may be rapidly debilitating and irreversible.
Encphalopathy is reported.
Which azole antifungal is most likely to interfere with steroidogenesis?
• Ketoconazole, an imidazole antifungal that is currently used only topically, has a high risk of adrenal
suppression due to its strong inhibition of steroidogenesis.
• Itraconazole and posaconazole have a moderate risk of adrenal suppression.
• FYI: Cortisol, aldosterone, and the androgen precursors of sex hormones, dehydroepiandrostenedione
(DHEA) and DHEA sulfate are synthesized in the adrenal cortex. 70
--- SLIDE 71 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the major mechanism of drug interactions with the azole antifungal drugs?
• CYP inhibition. All azole antifungals are strong CYP3A4 inhibitors, except fluconazole and isavuconazole,
which both inhibit CYP3A4 but with moderate affinity for the enzyme.
One of the azole antifungals is cleared renally and excreted unchanged in urine. Which one? What do we
need to think about in terms of dosing this drug?
• Fluconazole, 80% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
• Dosage adjustment for patients with renal insufficiency.
• Note: Fluconazole is a strong inhibitor of CYP2C19 and inhibit CYP2C9 and 3A4 with lower affinity.
Two triazole antifungal drugs are formulated with cyclodextrin to solubilize the hydrophobic drugs for
intravenous administration. What toxicity can occur in patients with renal insufficiency? What are the two
drugs?
• Accumulation of cyclodextrin in patients with renal insufficiency can cause toxicity to the kidney tubular
cells. The drugs are voriconazole and posaconazole.
One of the antifungals in this group does not require dosage adjustment for patients with renal insufficiency
or liver impairment. What is it? Why are dosage adjustments not required?
• The drug is posaconazole because it is minimally metabolized (~17% by UGT) by the liver, excreted
unchanged in the feces, and is not cleared through the kidney.
71
--- SLIDE 72 ---
Check your knowledge
What is the fungal cell target of the echinocandins?
• They inhibit -1,3-glucan synthase complex, which disrupts the integrity of the fungal cell wall, leading to
cell death.
What is the spectrum of action of echinocandins?
• Candida spp (fungicidal); Aspergillosus spp (fungistatic)
What is the clinical importance of the echinocandins?
• Treatment and prophylaxis of serious Candida infections; treatment of invasive aspergillosis not
responsive to other drugs
What is the effect of drug interactions with concurrently administered drugs?
• Caspofungin and cyclosporine may increase plasma concentrations of each other increasing the risk of
hepatotoxicity (echinocandins) and nephrotoxicity (cyclosporine)
• Micafungin increases sirolimus levels increasing the risk of numerous toxicities.
• All may diminish the therapeutic effects of Sacharomyces boulardii, a beneficial yeast in the gut
microbiome.
• Ibrexafungerp: CYP3A4 inducers (avoid) and inhibitors (caution)
What are the recommendations for use of glucan synthase inhibitors in pregnancy?
• Echinocandins: Animal reproduction studies suggest the potential for fetal harm. Use only if benefit to the
mother outweighs the risk to the fetus.
72
--- SLIDE 73 ---
Review: Compare and contrast griseofulvin and terbinafine.
ADME Oral, once daily Extensive hepatic metabolism
G: Take with fatty food Terminal t½:
G: 9-24 h; T: 200-400 h at steady state
Mechanism of G: binds microtubules in new keratin and prevents mitosis
action T: squalene epoxidase inhibitor reducing ergosterol synthesis
Therapeutic uses Dermatophyte infections
G: DOC for tinea capitis in children
DOC: drug of choice
T: DOC for onychomycosis
Adverse effects Both generally well tolerated
GI disturbances, hypersensitivity reactions
Drug interactions G: CYP inducer
T: Strong CYP2D6 inhibitor
Contraindications G: liver failure, porphyria, pregnancy
T: chronic or acute liver disease, avoid in pregnancy
73
--- SLIDE 74 ---
Resources
• Access Medicine Ganong’s Review of Medical Physiology, 26e, 2019; General Principles
• Access Medicine Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023; Chapter 61:
Antifungal Agents
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e, 2022; Chapter 211: Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and
Treatment of Fungal Infections
• Access Medicine Jawetz, Melnick, & Adelberg Mdedical Microbiology, 28e, 2019; Chapter 45: Medical Mycology
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 16e, 2024; Chapter 48: Antifungal Agents
• Clinical Key Murray, Rosenthal, and Pfaller Medical Microbiology 9e, 2022; Chapter 61: Antifungal Agents
• UpToDate Lexidrug monographs
74
--- SLIDE 75 ---
Lecture Feedback Form
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R