SOURCE: Lecture # 184. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antiretroviral Agents, Part 1
Overview of antiretroviral therapy,
NRTIs and INSTIs
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Following completion of the preparation materials, students should be able to:
1. Compare and contrast the within-class and between-class pharmacokinetic properties of the
antiretroviral agents.
2. Describe the structure-activity relationships, mechanism of action, and mechanisms of viral
resistance of each class of antiretroviral agents in relation to specifically targeted viral proteins
and give examples.
3. Explain the clinical rationales for selection of specific antiretroviral therapy (ART) and give
examples for:
ART-naïve patients Transgender patients
Switch to 2-drug ART Women (assigned female at birth)
Treatment-experienced patients Pregnant people and peripartum care
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) Neonates
Post-exposure prohylaxis (PEP) Pediatric patients
Older patients
4. Differentiate the class and drug-specific adverse effects and their impact on patient adherence
to therapy.
5. Explain the mechanism-related and metabolism- and transport-related drug interactions for
specific drugs, including the antiretroviral drugs that should not be used in combination.
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links
ScholarRx Brick: Pharmacology of Antiretroviral Drugs > General Microbiology
Bricks: Antimicrobial Agents > Antiviral Drugs > Drugs to Treat and Prevent HIV Infection
https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-and-prevent-hiv-infection
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024, Chapter 49: Antiviral
Agents > Antiretroviral Agents
https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755260
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e,
2023; Chapter 34: Antiviral Drugs > Section VII. Treatment of HIV Infection
https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329261&bookid=3222#253329364
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
HIV Basic Statistics
• In 2021, 36,136 people received an HIV diagnosis in the United States and
dependent areas. The annual number of new diagnoses decreased 7%
from 2017 to 2021.
• An estimated 1.2 million people in the United States had HIV at the end of
2021, the most recent year for which this information is available. Of
those people, about 87% knew they had HIV.
• In 2021, male-to-male sexual contact accounted for 67% (24,107) of all
new HIV diagnoses in the United States and dependent areas. In the same
year, heterosexual contact accounted for 22% (8,059) of all HIV diagnoses.
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/statistics.html
Last reviewed May 22, 2023
--- SLIDE 6 ---
What you need to know and understand
• HIV life cycle → Drug targets
(1) Entry (binding and fusion to host cell), (2) reverse transcription, (3) integration of HIV cDNA into
host genome, (4) replication (transcription and translation), (5) assembly and budding (6)
maturation
• ART resistance: HIV reverse transcriptase is error prone and lacks a proofreading function.
Mutation is frequent. Drug therapy provides the necessary selective pressure to promote growth
of drug-resistant viruses that arise naturally. Resistance testing is important to help guide
treatment decisions in both treatment-naïve and treatment-experienced patients.
• Goal of therapy: To restore immunocompetence – increase the CD4 cell count and reduce viral
load to undetectable (suppression of HIV RNA replication), reduce HIV-associated morbidity and
prolong the duration and quality of survival, and prevent HIV transmission
• Drug classes: nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), integrase strand transfer
inhibitors (INSTIs), nonnucleoside/tide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), protease
inhibitors (PIs), entry inhibitors, and capsid inhibitor.
• Pharmacokinetic enhancers: Two pharmacokinetic enhancers (“boosters”), ritonavir and
cobicistat, are potent inhibitors of CYP3A4, which increases systemic levels of the partner drug
allowing for less frequent dosing and less variation in drug levels, resulting in enhanced efficacy
and reduced resistance.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
What you need to know and understand
• ART principles apply across all populations.
• Recommended initial therapy in treatment-naïve patients consists of a 2 NRTI backbone with
an integrase inhibitor (INSTI-based ART). An NNRTI or boosted PI backbone may be
considered in certain clinical situations.
• Note: Several 2-drug combination regimens are FDA approved for stable patients who meet
specific criteria.
• Treatment-experienced patients require a new regimen based on evaluation of the patient’s
past ART and previous and current genotype and/or phenotype of the virus. Drug resistance
tests determine which drugs are likely to be fully or partially active.
• NRTIs
− First-generation – didanosine, stavudine, zidovudine: Most toxicities are due to inhibition of
mitochondrial DNA polymerase causing peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, and lipoatrophy
and life-threatening hepatotoxicity characterized by lactic acidosis, hepatomegaly, and
steatosis. Of the first-generation drugs, only zidovudine is available in the US.
− Second-generation – tenofovir (TDF and TAF), emtricitabine, lamivudine, and abacavir. TDF
can cause proximal renal tubulopathy and bone loss but TAF has less long-term kidney and
bone toxicity. Lamivudine and emtricitabine are structurally similar and should not be used
together. Abacavir can cause a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction. Patients should be
screened for HLA-B*5701 allele. 7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
What you need to know and understand – Adverse Effects
• INSTIs:
− Integrase inhibitors are bictegravir, dolutegravir, elvitegravir, and raltegravir. They are well
tolerated, highly effective, and have a high barrier to resistance. They are recommended first
line drugs with 2NRTIs for initial ART.
• NNRTIs:
− This group is associated with varying degrees of GI intolerance and skin rash.
− The two most frequently used agents, efavirenz and rilpivirine, cause QT interval
prolongation and are associated with neurological and psychiatric side effects.
− NNRTIs are metabolized by, and are inhibitors and inducers of, various CYPs. There is a
high potential for drug-drug interactions.
• PIs:
− Class side effects include insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, diabetes, hyperlipidemia,
lipodystrophy, hepatotoxicity, bleeding in patients with hemophilia, and PR interval
prolongation. PIs are CYP3A4 substrates and are used with boosters – CYP3A4 inhibitors.
There is a high potential for drug-drug interactions.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
What you need to know and understand – adverse effects
• EIs: Entry inhibitors have different mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetic profiles, clinical
uses, and adverse effects.
− CCR5 antagonists: Maraviroc is generally well tolerated. The drug has been associated
with severe hepatoxicity and related rash or fever. Liver function monitoring is
recommended.
− Fusion inhibitor: Enfuvirtide is a peptide given by subcutaneous injection twice daily and
often causes local cutaneous reactions.
− Attachment inhibitor: Fostemsavir is an oral prodrug (active temsavir). Its most common
side effect is nausea. Other effects are QT interval prolongation and elevated liver
enzymes in patients with hepatitis B or hepatitis C viral infections. Strong CYP3A4
inducers should be avoided.
− Post attachment inhibitor: Ibalizumab is given by intravenous infusion every 2 weeks. The
most common adverse effects are diarrhea, dizziness, nausea, and rash.
• Capsid inhibitor: Lenacapavir directly binds the interface between capsid protein (p24)
subunits in hexamers, changing its conformation, which stabilizes it, prevents viral uncoating,
and disrupts the viral lifecycle at several steps.
9
--- SLIDE 10 ---
A colored transmission electron micrograph of the H.I.V. virus, in green, attaching to a white blood cell, in orange.
Credit...NIBSC/Science Source
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/23/health/what-we-learned-2019.html?te=1&nl=evening-briefing&emc=edit_ne_20191228
--- SLIDE 11 ---
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en is an excellent resource.
It offers information on HIV/AIDS treatment, prevention, and
research.
--- SLIDE 12 ---
“Care for HIV/AIDS patients has shifted from
specialists to primary care physicians.”1
• Infectious diseases experts encourage doctors to participate
in training opportunities and form relationships with local
HIV/AIDS specialists to ensure they have a basic
understanding of the disease.1,2
1.American Medical News amednews.com Christine S. Moyer amednews staff — Posted July 4, 2011
2.Institutes of Medicine Report: HIV Screening and Access to Care: Health Care System Capacity for Increased HIV Testing
and Provision of Care The National Academic Press(2011)
12
http://www.iom.edu/Activities/PublicHealth/HIVScreeningCare.aspx
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV)
• Nucleocapsid core; lipid bilayer envelope
(derived from the host cell plasma
membrane)
• gag → 3 structural proteins
• pol → 3 enzymes
• env → large envelope protein
Harrison’s, 19e; Figure 226-2B
• several small genes
• gp120 binds CD4 → gp120 conformational
change → binds to chemokine receptor →
exposes gp41→ attachment to host cell →
gp41 forms hairpin structure drawing the
two membranes together → fusion
Harrison’s Figures 226-4
13
--- SLIDE 14 ---
HIV budding from infected white cell
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Antiretroviral Drug Classes
NRTIs
Capsid
INSTIs
inhibitor
ART
Drug
Classes
Entry
NNRTIs
inhibitors
PIs
Many ARV drugs are formulated as 2-drug and 3-drug fixed-dose combinations
for improved adherence to therapy.
15
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Here is a YouTube video you may find helpful: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-2ilZA-_aw
Targets of Antiretroviral Drugs
Fostemsavir
Ibalizumab
Lenacapavir
Replicative cycle of HIV-1 showing the sites of action of available antiretroviral agents. Available antiretroviral agents are shown in red.
In this figure, gp120 + gp41 indicates extracellular and intracellular domains, respectively, of envelope glycoprotein.
Citation: Chapter 64 Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 13e; 2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172486528 Accessed: April 21, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Viral Resistance to Antiretroviral Drugs
HIV reverse transcriptase is error
prone and lacks a proofreading
Transmitted drug resistance is acquired
function → mutation is frequent
through person to person spread.
• HIV has a high mutation rate and a
tremendous number of infectious virions.
There is a high likelihood that all
Virologic failure:
untreated infected individuals harbor
Inability to achieve or maintain
viruses with single amino acid
suppression of viral replication to an
mutations that confer some degree of
HIV RNA level <200 copies/mL.
resistance.
17
--- SLIDE 18 ---
Goals of Antiretroviral Therapy (ART)
1. Maximally and durably suppress plasma HIV RNA (viral load)
2. Restore and preserve immunologic function
3. Reduce HIV-associated morbidity
4. Prolong the duration and quality of survival
5. Prevent HIV transmission
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) is recommended in all HIV-infect individuals to prevent
transmission.
 Consistent and effective use of ART resulting in sustained reduction in viral load,
in conjunction with:
• consistent condom usage,
• safer sex and drug use practices, and
• detection and treatment of STDs
are essential tools for prevention of sexual and blood-borne transmission of HIV.
18
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Principles of ART
ART has dramatically reduced HIV-associated morbidity and mortality and has transformed HIV infection
into a manageable chronic condition, with life expectancy approaching that for people without HIV.
Current standard of care is 3-4 antiretroviral agents for entire duration of treatment.
2 NRTIs + an INSTI, or an NNRTI, or a boosted PI
Some 2-drug regimens
are FDA approved in
Preferred initial ARV regimen
selected patients.
Outcome of initial therapy should be:
• Undetectable viral load (plasma HIV RNA <20-75 copies/mL) within 24 weeks of
starting treatment.
• CD4 count increase of 50-150 cells/mm3 in first year
Treatment failure generally requires implementation of a completely new combination
of drugs.
It is usually a consequence of nonadherence.
NRTI: Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; NNRTI: Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor;
PI: Protease inhibitor; INST: Integrase strand transfer inhibitor 19
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Adverse Effects of Antiretroviral Therapy
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome:
• reversal of immunodeficiency →  host immune system → inflammatory reaction
to overt or subclinical opportunistic infections or malignancies
Class- and drug-specific toxicities:
• Later-generation drugs are generally more tolerable the first-generation versions.
Significant pharmacokinetic drug interactions:
• substrates, inhibitors and/or inducers of metabolic enzymes and transporters
20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
NRTIs
Nucleoside / Nucleotide
Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
• Abacavir
2 NRTIs: The “backbone” of ART regimens
•  Lamivudine
• Activity against HIV-1 and HIV-2.
• Approved for HIV-1 treatment with other ARVs
•  Emtricitabine
• Some agents suppress HBV replication, which is an
•  Tenofovir
important consideration for HIV/HBV coinfected
patients.
•  Zidovudine
Didanosine, stavudine, and zalcitabine are no longer marketed.
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Basic Structure of Nucleosides and Nucleotides
NRTIs are nucleoside
analogs,
except tenofovir
which is a nucleotide analog.
NRTIs lack 3 -OH group
Nucleoside = nucleic acid-ribose
Nucleotide = nucleic acid-ribose-phosphate(s)
The Big Picture; Medical Biochemistry: Chapter 4.
Nucleosides, Nucleotides, DNA, and RNA; Figure 4-1
--- SLIDE 23 ---
NRTIs are activated by tri-phosphorylation by host kinases
zidovudine (ZDV, AZT) lamivudine (3TC)
stavudine (d4T) emtricitabine (FTC)
zalcitabine (ddC)
abacavir tenofovir (TFV)
(ABC) didanosine (ddI)
Citation: Chapter 64 Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 13e; 2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172486528 Accessed: April 22, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 24 ---
1) NRTIs are phosphorylated
by cellular enzymes.
2) Triphosphorylated drugs
competitively inhibit
Compare to normal
incorporation of native
strand formation:
nucleotides
into the nascent viral RNA-
DNA duplex
and
3) Terminate elongation of
proviral DNA chain due to
the absence of the 3 -OH
group, which is needed for
chain elongation
4) Block replication
The Big Picture:
Citation: Chapter 64 Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 13e; 2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172486528 Accessed: April 22, 2021 Medical Biochemistry
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
Figure 4-5
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Viral Resistance to NRTIs: Point Mutations
• Usually, high level resistance requires 3 to 4 codon substitutions.
• However, M184V/I single amino acid substitution
o Confers high-level resistance to lamivudine and emtricitabine
o Confers low-level resistance to abacavir
o But restores susceptibility to tenofovir and zidovudine.
• Other common mutations are K65R and L74R
• Cross-resistance is reported following prolonged therapy.
M=methionine, V=valine, I=isoleucine, K=lysine, R=arginine, L=leucine
M184V/I single mutation of methionine-to-valine or isoleucine substitution at position 184 position.
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
NRTIs and Mitochondrial Toxicity
Inhibiting host DNA polymerase-γ
(mitochondrial enzyme)

Mitochondrial Toxicity
Strength of DNA polymerase- inhibition:
In vitro studies
Zalcitabine (high toxicity) >> didanosine > stavudine ≥ zidovudine >>>
tenofovir = lamivudine = emtricitabine = abacavir
⎯The second-generation NRTIs have very low mitochondrial toxicity.⎯
Manifestations
myopathy Possibly related to Hepatic steatosis and hepatic failure with lactic
peripheral mitochondrial toxicity: acidosis occurs rarely and can be fatal.
neuropathy pancreatitis
 NRTI treatment should be suspended in the
lipoatrophy bone marrow suppression
setting of rapidly rising aminotransferase levels,
lactic acidosis cardiomyopathy
progressive hepatomegaly, or metabolic
hepatic steatosis
acidosis of unknown cause.
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Features of Specific NRTIs: Tenofovir DF (TDF) and Tenofovir AF (TAF)
Adenosine analogs. TAF is administered at a lower dose than TDF →
Oral, well absorbed, P-glycoprotein substrate, lower plasma concentrations.
minimal hepatic metabolism, urine as tenofovir, However, intracellular concentrations of active
t½ 10-50 h tenofovir diphosphate are higher.
intracellular
TDF is rapidly converted after absorption by TAF circulates as uncleaved prodrug, which is
hydrolases to tenofovir, which is taken up by taken up into cells. TAF is them metabolized
host cells and metabolized to TFV-DF. intracellularly to TFV-DF.
TDF and TAF have broad therapeutic applications and are available in numerous fixed-dose
combinations.
• First-line NRTIs for treatment of HIV-1 • Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
• Pregnant patients, all trimesters • Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP)
• TDF Children ≥2 years old • Chronic HBV treatment and prophylaxis in
• TAF Children, adolescents ≥12 years old immunocompromised patients
Both TDF and TAF suppress HBV infection → Severe acute exacerbation of HBV infection and
hepatitis can occur in HIV/HBV coinfected patients treated with TDF or TAF if the NRTI is
discontinued. (US Boxed Warning)
27
--- SLIDE 28 ---
TDF and TAF Adverse Effects and Drug Interactions
TDF and TAF are generally well tolerated.
➢ TAF has lower plasma concentrations and has less long-term kidney and bone toxicity
compared with TDF.
Main toxicities: Kidney and bone adverse effects
• Renal impairment: Increases in serum creatinine, proteinuria, glycosuria,
hypophosphatemia, acute tubular necrosis
• Kidney injury: Proximal tubular dysfunction (Fanconi syndrome), acute kidney injury,
chronic kidney disease, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
➢ Monitor renal function. Avoid TDF (if possible) in patients with baseline risk factors for
kidney injury.
• Bone loss: Decreased bone mineral density
Drug interactions:
• Tenofovir + abacavir → high rates of virologic failure
• P-glycoprotein inhibitors: Ritonavir or cobicistat boosted drugs may increase tenofovir levels.
• TAF only – P-gp inducers are contraindicated: Rifampin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital TAF levels →  efficacy
28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
NRTIs Drug-specific properties: Lamivudine and Emtricitabine
Cytidine analogs. Emtricitabine is fluorinated lamivudine. They should not be used together.
Oral, well absorbed t½
intracellular
Good bioavailability lamivudine 10-15 h (high dose for 1x daily dosing),
excreted in urine as unchanged drug emtricitabine ~40 h (once daily)
• Both drugs suppress HBV infection
Severe acute exacerbation of HBV infection and hepatitis can occur in HIV/HBV coinfected patients
treated with lamivudine or emtricitabine if the NRTI is discontinued. (US Boxed Warning)
• Resistance: M184V/I point mutations → high level resistance.
• K65R, L74R also reduce susceptibility.
Well tolerated
Emtricitabine may cause hyperpigmentation, usually on the hands and/or soles of the feet
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Features of Specific NRTIs: Abacavir and Zidovudine
Oral, well absorbed, hepatic metabolism by alcohol dehydrogenase, glucuronyl
transferase, urine as metabolites, t½ 12-26 h
intracellular
Intracellular metab.: abacavir monophosphate → carbovir MP →→ active carbovir TP
Pharmacogenomics: All patients must be screened for HLA-B*5701
• Hypersensitivity reactions: multiorgan involvement, potentially fatal
Abacavir
Abacavir should not be given to patients with the HLA-B*5701 genotype nor restarted in
guanosine
patients who have a hypersensitivity reaction.
analog
• Resistance: M184V/I and K65R frequently found in patients receiving abacavir
• Frequently paired with lamivudine as a component of NRTI backbone
• Avoid using with tenofovir due to high rate of virologic failure with the combination
• Alcohol (EtOH) →  abacavir levels
Oral (2x daily), IV (continuous infusion), hepatic glucuronidation, urine unchanged drug,
t½ ~7 h
intracellular
Zidovudine
Therapeutic uses:
thymidine
• Perinatal IV infusion to prevent vertical transmission
analog
• ART for neonates
Zidovudine is otherwise rarely used: twice daily dosing, more severe adverse effects,
and inferior virologic potency (zidovudine-lamivudine v. TDF-emtricitabine ART)
30
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Questions
1. What are the important (clinically relevant) take-aways about the PK properties of
the NRTIs class?
2. How is viral resistance related to NRTIs’ mechanism of action and effects?
3. How is mitochondrial toxicity related to the NRTIs’ mechanism of action?
1. Oral / minimal systemic metabolism (except abacavir) / active drug excreted in
urine / once daily dosing – second-generation drugs
2. Point mutations in RT amino acids at the drugs binding site. M184V/I confers
high-level resistance to lamivudine and emtricitabine but improves susceptibility to
tenofovir and zidovudine. K65R confers reduced susceptibility to all four NRTIs.
3. NRTIs bind mitochondrial DNA polymerase-gamma, resulting in myopathy,
peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, lipoatrophy, lactic acidosis, hepatic steatosis.
Low potential with 2nd-gen NRTIs.
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Questions
1. What are the main toxicities of tenofovir and abacavir.
2. Which of the second-generation NRTIs should not be combined and why?
3. What screening test must be performed prior to administering abacavir and why?
4. What drugs can cause reactivation of HBV and hepatitis when withdrawn in patients with
HIV/HBV coinfection?
1. Kidney and bone toxicity: impaired renal function, proximal tubule dysfunction, acute kidney
injury, chronic kidney disease, nephrogenic diabetes insipidis.
2. Lamivudine and emtricitabine because emtricitabine is fluorinated lamivudine (cytidine analogs)
that compete for intracellular phosphorylation →  effectiveness.
3. HLA-B*5701 which is associated with severe multiorgan hypersensitivity reactions in patients
positive for this allele.
4. Lamivudine, emtricitabine, tenofovir DF, tenofovir AF.
--- SLIDE 33 ---
INSTIs
HIV Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors
Bictegravir (BIC)
Dolutegravir (DTG)
Elvitegravir (ELV)
Raltegravir (RAL)
Cabotegravir (CAB)
Activity against HIV-1 and HIV-2
INSTIs are well tolerated, highly effective, and have a high barrier to
resistance.
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
INSTI Characteristics
Second-generation INSTIs First-generation INSTIs
Characteristics BIC DTG ELV RAL
Dosing Once daily Once daily Once daily 400 mg 2x daily
2x/d if used with Cobicistat boost 1200 mg 1x daily
CYP3A4 or UGT1A1 required.
inducers
Single drug tab no yes no yes
Fixed-dose combos BIC-TAF-emtricitabine DTG-ABC-emtricitabine ELVc-TDF-emtricitabine no
DTG-lamivudine ELVc-TAF-emtricitabine
Virologic efficacy: In vitro: yes Yes, some isolates no no
ELV or RAL Clinical trial data are not Higher dose 2x/d
Resistant HIV available.
Adverse effects Weight gain, nausea, diarrhea, headache, insomnia
Depression and suicidality are rare, occurring mainly in patients with preexisting psychiatric condition.
CK (4%) Hypersensitivity triglycerides CK, myopathy
Hepatotoxicity LDL cholesterol Hypersensitivity
CK, myositis SJS/TEN
CYP3A4 DDIs CYP3A4 substrate CYP3A4 substrate CYP3A4 substrate No
(minor) COBI 3A4 inhibitor
Antacids Oral absorption of all INSTIs may be reduced by polyvalent cations,
Supplements such as calcium, magnesium, aluminum.
Other significant DDIs P-gp and UGT1A1 P-gp and UGT1A1 UGT1A1 substrate UGT1A1 substrate
substrate substrate COBI Pgp inhibitor
34
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/hiv-clinical-guidelines-adult-and-adolescent-arv/integrase-strand-transfer-inhibitor?view=full
--- SLIDE 35 ---
• INSTIs block the
catalytic activity of the
HIV-encoded integrase
→ prevents integration
of virus DNA into the
host chromosome
• Humans lack integrase,
and human DNA is not
known to undergo
excision and
Mechanism of action of the HIV integrase inhibitor raltegravir
reintegration.
Citation: Chapter 64 Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 13e; 2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172486528 Accessed: April 22, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 36 ---
INSTIs Therapeutic Uses and Resistance
Activity (as a class) Resistance
• Potent against both HIV-1 and HIV-2 • Primary mutations in integrase
gene (Q184R/H/K, or N155H) and
• Treatment-naïve and treatment-
experienced • Additional secondary mutations can
accumulate and cause high-level
• Adults
resistance and cross-resistance.
• Adolescents, and
• Pediatrics
The INSTIs are generally well
Dolutegravir and bictegravir have a
tolerated.
high barrier to resistance.
Headache and GI effects are the most
Raltegravir and elvitegravir have a
frequently reported side effects.
lower barrier to resistance.
Cabotegravir: Injection site reactions
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Cabotegravir ART: long-acting IM suspension
Cabotegravir is available in oral form, as a long-acting IM suspension for injection and fixed-dose
cabotegravir and rilpivirine long-acting suspension for injection.
For gluteal administration only (may not be an option for people with buttocks implants or fillers).
1. Treatment: Cabotegravir + rilpivirine
• Oral lead-in (optional, to determine tolerability):
daily oral cabotegravir + daily oral rilpivirine x 1 month
➢ Continuation: IM cabotegravir-rilpivirine every 4 to 8 weeks (dosing differs)
• Oral bridging therapy: Patients who plan to miss a scheduled dose of IM CAB-RPV by >7 days.
Required criteria: HIV-1 infections in adults and adolescents…
Who have no baseline resistance to either medication,
Who have no prior virologic failures,
Who do not have active hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (unless also receiving an oral HBV
active regimen),
Who are not pregnant and are not planning on becoming pregnant, and
Who are not receiving medications with significant drug interactions with oral or injectable CAB
or RPV.
2. PrEP: HIV-negative individuals, IM cabotegravir with or without oral lead-in
37
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Questions
1. What properties make INSTIs the preferred first-line choice for ART backbone?
2. Which two are the first-line INSTIs?
3. What is the role of cabotegravir-rilpiverine 2-drug ART in the treatment of HIV-1
patients?
4. What is another therapeutic use of cabotegravir IM?
• INSTIs are well-tolerated, highly effective, and have a high barrier to resistance.
• Dolutegravir and bictegravir are second-generation INSTs with a higher barrier to
resistance than the first-generation INSTIs and are available in fixed-dose combination
allowing one pill once daily dosing for improved patient adhererence.
CAB-RPV is indicated for patients who have no baseline resistance to either
•
medication,no prior virologic failures, do not have active HBV infection (unless also
receiving an oral HBV active regimen), are not pregnant and are not planning on
becoming pregnant, and are not receiving medications with significant drug
interactions with oral or injectable CAB or RPV.
• PrEP maintenance CAB IM once every 2 months.
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Summary of NRTIs and NNRTIs
--- SLIDE 40 ---
• Antiretroviral therapy (ART) consists of a combination of antiretroviral drugs that
suppress HIV replication. The combination increases potency against the virus and
reduces the likelihood of the virus developing resistance. ART reduces the morbidity
and mortality rates and improves quality of life. Suppressing viral replication below a
detectable level reduces transmission. ART is recommended for everyone who has
HIV. Adherence to therapy is essential for suppression of replication. The patient’s
barriers to adherence should be assessed prior to therapy and at every visit.
• Drugs targeting every step in the HIV replication cycle have been developed. The
four classes of drugs for initial treatment are NRTIs, INSTIs, NNRTIs, and PIs.
• Resistance arises from point mutations in binding sites. Transmitted drug resistance
is acquired through person to person spread. There is a high likelihood that all
untreated infected individuals harbor viruses with single amino acid mutations that
confer some degree of resistance.
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
• Two second-generation NRTIs form the ART backbone for initial therapy: tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate, tenofovir alafenamide, emtricitabine, lamivudine, and abacavir.
Lamivudine and emtricitabine are structurally similar and not used together. Tenofovir
and abacavir should not be used together because of high rates of virologic failure.
• NRTIs have a low affinity for host DNA polymerase except mitochondrial DNA
polymerase-gamma.
• Many NRTI toxicities are believed to be due to mitochondrial toxicity: myopathy,
peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, lipoatrophy, and hepatic steatosis, and lactic
acidosis, which can be fatal. Pancreatitis, bone marrow suppression, and
cardiomyopathy may be related to mitochondrial toxicity. First-generation NRTIs are
most associated with mitochondrial toxicities. Tenofovir, TDF, can cause proximal
renal tubulopathy and bone mineral loss. TAF is administered in lower doses and has
less kidney and bone toxicity than TDF. Abacavir can cause life-threatening
hypersensitivity reaction. Screening for HLA-B*5701 allele is necessary prior to
starting therapy.
• NRTIs are oral and excreted in the urine. Abacavir is metabolized by alcohol
dehydrogenase and glucuronyl transferase.
41
--- SLIDE 42 ---
• Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs) are bictegravir, dolutegravir, elvitegravir
(boosted with cobicistat), raltegravir, and cabotegravir. BIC and DOL are first-line ART
backbone with 2 NRTIs for treatment-naïve patients. Cabotegravir long-acting IM
suspension is a PrEP option and is formulated with rilpivirine as 2-drug ART for
treatment of selected, stabile HIV-1 patients. CAB is formulated as a tablet for oral lead-
in or bridging therapy.
• INSTIs inhibit the insertion of proviral DNA into the host cell genome.
• Resistance occurs with single point mutations in the integrase gene. BIC and DOL have
a high barrier to resistance. RAL and ELV have a lower barrier to resistance.
• The INSTIs are taken orally once daily (raltegravir twice daily or once daily at a higher
dose). DOL, RAL, and CAB are UGT1A1 substrates. BIC and ELV are CYP3A4
substrates. Efficacy can be reduced when administered with UGT1A1, CYP3A4, and P-
glycoprotein inducers.
• The INSTIs are well tolerated. Headache and GI discomfort are the most frequently
reported side effects.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
References
• NIH HIV information: https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e,
2022: Chapters 64: Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection
• Access Medicine Katzung & Vanderah’s, Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 16e, 2024:
Chapter 49: Antiviral Agents
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e, 2023; Chapter 202:
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders
• Access Medicine Sherris Medical Microbiology, 8e, 2023; Chapter 18: Human Retroviruses
• Lexidrugs monographs April 2024
• UpToDate, various, literature review current through Mar 2024
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R