SOURCE: Lecture # 185. L. Goldstein, Pharm.D. (PPT).pdf

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antiretroviral Agents Part 2
NNRTIs, Protease Inhibitors
Entry Inhibitors, Capsid Inhibitor
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Division of Pharmacology
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- SLIDE 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
2
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Following completion of the preparation materials, students should be able to:
1. Compare and contrast the within-class and between-class pharmacokinetic properties of the
antiretroviral agents.
2. Describe the structure-activity relationships, mechanism of action, and mechanisms of viral
resistance of each class of antiretroviral agents in relation to specifically targeted viral proteins
and give examples.
3. Explain the clinical rationales for selection of specific antiretroviral therapy (ART) and give
examples for:
ART-naïve patients Transgender patients
Switch to 2-drug ART Women (assigned female at birth)
Treatment-experienced patients Pregnant people and peripartum care
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) Neonates
Post-exposure prohylaxis (PEP) Pediatric patients
Older patients
4. Differentiate the class and drug-specific adverse effects and their impact on patient adherence
to therapy.
5. Explain the mechanism-related and metabolism- and transport-related drug interactions for
specific drugs, including the antiretroviral drugs that should not be used in combination.
--- SLIDE 4 ---
Links
ScholarRx Brick: Pharmacology of Antiretroviral Drugs > General Microbiology
Bricks: Antimicrobial Agents > Antiviral Drugs > Drugs to Treat and Prevent HIV Infection
https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-and-prevent-hiv-infection
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024, Chapter 49: Antiviral
Agents > Antiretroviral Agents https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281755260
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, 8e,
2023; Chapter 34: Antiviral Drugs > Section VII. Treatment of HIV Infection
https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253329261&bookid=3222#253329364
4
--- SLIDE 5 ---
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines is an excellent
resource.
It offers information on HIV/AIDS treatment, prevention, and
research.
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Antiretroviral Drug Classes
NRTIs
Capsid
INSTIs
inhibitor
ART
Drug
Classes
Entry
NNRTIs
inhibitors
PIs
Many ARV drugs are formulated as 2-drug and 3-drug fixed-dose combinations
for improved adherence to therapy.
6
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Non-nucleoside
Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
Doravirine
Rilpivirine
Efavirenz
Nevirapine
Etravirine
NNRTIs are highly effective in the treatment of
HIV-1 infections when used with 2 NRTIs.
They have a low barrier to resistance, side effects, and a high
potential for drug interactions.
7
--- SLIDE 8 ---
NNRTI Characteristics
Characteristics DOR EFV RPV*
Dosing Once daily Once daily Once daily
Food requirement With or without food Empty stomach With food (needs acid pH)
Single drug tab yes yes yes
Fixed-dose combos DOR-TDF-emtricitabine EFV-TDF-emtricitabine RPV-TDF-emtricitabine
RPV-TAF-emtricitabine
Adverse effects Generally well tolerated Neuropsych side effects Generally well tolerated
Dizziness, abnormal Depression
dreams, headache Headache
depression, insomnia, QTc prolongation
more
Skin rash
QTc prolongation
CYP3A4 DDIs CYP3A4 substrate CYP3A4 substrate CYP3A4 substrate
Mixed inducer / inhibitor
Other significant None Inducer of PPIs:  gastric pH →
DDIs CYP2B6, 2C19  absorption → avoid
*Rilpivirine: Treatment-naïve adults with HIV RNA 100,000 copies/ mL and CD4 count 200 c/mm3 due to increased
risk of virologic failure in patients with baseline viral load >100,000 copies/mL.
8
--- SLIDE 9 ---
NNRTIs are noncompetitive inhibitors.
bind to allosteric site
induce conformational  activity of the
on reverse
change enzyme
transcriptase
NNRTIs do
not require
activation by
cellular
enzymes
red balls = catalytic site RT
domain
(p66 monomer)
yellow balls = NNRTI
the palm
in its binding pocket
domain
9
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:RTenzyme-hand.jpg
--- SLIDE 10 ---
NNRTIs: HIV Resistance Adverse Effects  Drug Interactions
Resistance
− Single amino acid changes in binding pocket confers high-level drug resistance.
− High-level cross-resistance occurs within the NNRTI class.
− Transmitted resistance of NNRTI-resistant HIV is more common than with INSTIs and PIs.
Resistance testing should be performed before initiation of NNRTI-based ART,
even in ART-naïve patients.
Rashes: Drug interactions: High potential
• Substrates and inducers or inhibitors of
• Occur frequently with all NNRTIs, usually
metabolic enzymes
during the first 4 weeks of therapy
– Usually mild and self-limited • Efavirenz-methadone → CYP2B6, 3A4
– SJS/TEN rarely induction may methadone levels and
lead to opioid withdrawal symptoms
• GI disturbances
10
--- SLIDE 11 ---
NNRTIs What you should know about nevirapine and etravirine
Nevirapine Etravirine
• Low barrier to resistance • Higher barrier to resistance
• Not recommended for initial ART • Option for treatment-experienced
patients (if the drug/HIV is susceptible)
• Mainly used as an option for presumptive
therapy in neonates at high-risk of HIV: • Reduced toxicity compared to efavirenz
ZDV + emtricitabine + nevirapine • May cause rash
• AEs: Hepatotoxicity, hepatic necrosis, • CYP3A4 substrate and inducer
rash, SJS/TEN/organ dysfunction
• CYP2C9, 2C19 inhibitor
• NVP should not be used in females with
CD4 count >250 cells/mm3 or males >400
cells/mm3 due to association with severe,
life-threatening, and fatal hepatotoxicity.
11
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Efavirenz Rash. Drug exanthem typical of efavirenz.
The Atlas of Emergency Medicine, 3e, Figure 20.40 (Photo contributor: Stephen Burdette, MD.)
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Questions to Review the Key Points
1. What are the important (clinically relevant) take-aways about the PK properties of the
NNRTIs class?
2. How is viral resistance related to NNRTIs’ mechanism of action?
3. What criteria must be met before rilpivirine is administered to the ART-naïve patient?
4. What are the class and drug-specific toxicities to remember?
5. Which patients are at highest risk for nevirapine-related hepatotoxicity?
1. Oral / extensive protein binding / extensive hepatic metabolism by CYPs / drug and metabolites
excreted in urine/feces / once daily dosing
2. Single mutations in RT drug binding site confers high level resistance and cross-resistance.
Etravirine has a higher barrier to resistance (used for treatment-experienced patients).
3. ART-naïve patients with viral load of >100,000 copies/mL and CD4 count of 200 c/mm3 should
not be initiated on rilpivirine due to increased risk of virologic failure.
4. Rash, GI discomfort. Efavirenz, rilpivirine neuropsychiatric effects and QT interval prolongation.
Doravirine some neuropsychiatric effects. Nevirapine hepatotoxicity. Discontinue NNRTI at first
sign of rash.
5. Females with CD4 count >250 c/mm3 and males with CD4 count >400 c/mm3
--- SLIDE 14 ---
HIV Protease Inhibitors
 Atazanavir, boosted
 Darunavir, boosted
Activity: HIV-1
Darunavir has more activity against HIV-2 than some other PIs.
PI-based regimens have demonstrated virologic potency, durability
in treatment-naïve patients, and a high barrier to resistance.
PIs have are associated with numerous side effects and drug interactions.
Lopinavir/r, fosamprenavir/r, saquinavir/r have lower efficacy, greater pill burden, or
increased toxicity and are not recommended for initial treatment in ART-naïve patients.
14
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Boosting the activity of PIs through CYP3A4 Inhibition
Ritonavir and Cobicistat are potent CYP3A4 and P-gp inhibitors.
This property is used to clinical advantage:
Active PI
concentrations
+
low-dose
duration of action
Ritonavir or Cobicistat
improved virologic activity
of the protease inhibitor
EASL
41st Meeting of the European Association for the Study of Liver Diseases
Vienna, Austria
April 26-30, 2006 https://www.natap.org/2006/EASL/EASL_01.htm
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Characteristics of PIs
Characteristics ATVc or ATVr DRVc or DRVr
Dosing Once daily Once daily: PI-naïve
with food Twice daily: Treatment-experienced pt
Fixed-dose combos ATVc DRVc and DRVc-TAF-emtricitabine
Adverse effects:
Class: nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, cardiac conduction abnormalities, glucose and lipid metabolism
– Cushingoid fat redistribution, LDL, TG, hyperglycemia, insulin resistance
Drug-specific Jaundice Skin rash (can be severe)
adverse effects  Indirect bilirubin (benign) Caution in patients with h/o sulfonamide
Cholelithiasis allergy.
Nephrolithiasis Increased serum transaminases
Kidney injury Liver toxicity, including hepatitis, reported.
Contraindicated in severe liver disease
CYP3A4 DDIs CYP3A4 substrate, inhibitor CYP3A4 substrate, inhibitor
Other significant PPIs, other drugs that Not applicable
DDIs  gastric pH →  absorption →
separate administration
Pregnancy: Boosted ATV or DRV twice daily are preferred PIs for initial therapy in all trimesters.16
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Reversible inhibitors of HIV-1 protease
Prevent proteolytic cleavage of
HIV gag and pol proteins
into a number of essential enzymes

Release of immature, noninfectious viral
particles
High-level resistance to PIs requires accumulation
of multiple point mutations in the pol gene.
Transmitted resistance is uncommon.
Cross-resistance between PIs is variable and
depends on the involved drugs.
Legend:
Mechanism of action of an HIV PI. Shown here is a phenylalanine-proline target
peptide sequence (in blue) for the protease enzyme (in golden brown) with chemical
structures of the native amino acids (in lower box) to emphasize homology of their
structures to that of saquinavir (at top).
Citation: Chapter 64 Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 13e; 2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=172486528 Accessed: April 22, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved Slide adapted by LG
--- SLIDE 18 ---
PIs: High Potential for Drug Interactions
Problem Relevant examples
Drugs with narrow therapeutic window
CYP3A4 inhibition → • Statins:  levels→  muscle toxicity risk (rhabdomyolysis,
Elevated levels of acute kidney injury if severe)
substrate drugs • Midazolam: narrow therapeutic window
• Many, many more
Digoxin (cardiotonic) is a substrate of P-glycoprotein; inhibition
P-glycoprotein inhibition
of P-gp →  risk of digoxin toxicity
Proposed mech: UGT Hormonal (estrogen) contraceptive decreased efficacy; use
induction by ritonavir/PI alternative method of contraception1
Methadone levels are decreased → may induce opioid
Unknown mechanism
withdrawal syndrome2
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Questions
1. What are the most commonly used PIs in ART for initial therapy?
2. What is the rationale for concomitant administration of ritonavir or cobicistat?
3. What adverse effects are associated with the PIs class?
• Boosted atazanavir and boosted darunavir, which have demonstrated virologic
potency, durability in treatment-naïve patients, and a high barrier to resistance.
• Strong inhibition of CYP3A4 increases the plasma concentrations of the PIs,
increases the duration of action, and improves the efficacy PI.
• PIs class adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; cardiac conduction
abnormalities; disturbances in glucose and lipid metabolism: hyperlipidemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, Cushingoid fat redistribution, hyperglycemia and insulin
resistance, in addition to drug-specific effects. ATV can cause
hyperbilirubinemia, jaundice, gall and kidney stones. DRV can cause rash and
liver toxicity.
19
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Entry Inhibitors

Maraviroc
Enfuvirtide
Fostemsavir
Ibalizumab
Top: Diagram of an HIV virion, with major envelope and capsid protein components labeled. Image
credit: http://www.avert.org/hiv-structure-and-life-cycle.htm
Bottom: R5 strains preferentially bind to CCR5 coreceptors; R4 strains preferentially bind to CXCR4 coreceptors
http://what-when-how.com/acp-medicine/hiv-and-aids-part-2/
20
--- SLIDE 21 ---
CCR5 Inhibitor
Maraviroc
Activity:
CCR5-tropic strains
of HIV-1only
21
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Maraviroc pharmacology
PK Oral, variable bioavailability 23-33%, CYP3A4, feces/urine
t½ 14-18 hours → 2x daily dosing
MOA Blocks binding of the HIV outer envelope protein gp120 to the CCR5 chemokine
receptor
Activity Activity: CCR5-tropic strains of HIV only
Resistance 1)Shift in tropism to CXCR4 or dual tropism
2)Mutations in the V3 loop of gp120 that allow virus binding in the presence of
inhibitor
Prior to therapy, tropism testing should be performed for presence of CCR5-tropic HIV-1 infection.
Therapy not recommended in patients with CXCR4- or dual/mixed tropic HIV-1 infection; efficacy
not demonstrated in this population.
Uses Treatment of CCR5-tropic HIV-1 infection 16 years old with other ARV drugs
Adverse Hepatotoxicity:
effects May be preceded by severe rash or evidence of systemic allergic reaction
Drug CYP3A4 strong inhibitors and inducers
interactions Consider therapy modification 22
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Fusion Inhibitor
Enfuvirtide
Activity: HIV-1
Pharmacotherapy. 2004;24(2) © 2004 ; Pharmacotherapy Publication;
http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/468807_2 23
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Enfuvirtide Pharmacology
Chemistry Synthetic peptide (36 amino acids) derived from a part of the transmembrane
gp41 protein of HIV-1 involved in the fusion
PK SubQ; Metabolized by proteolytic hydrolysis, t½ ~4 hours → 2x daily
MOA Binds HIV envelope protein gp41 Inhibits the conformational change in gp41
required for membrane fusion → Inhibits the fusion of HIV-1 virus with CD4
cells
Resistance Mutations in the codon of the enfuvirtide binding domain of gp41
Use Treatment-experienced: Adults and children ≥ 6 years old
Evidence of HIV replication despite ongoing antiretroviral therapy
Combination with at least two other active antiretroviral drugs
Adverse Frequent local cutaneous reactions (injection site) pain, erythema, induration,
effects and nodules and twice daily dosing make long-term use difficult.
Drug No known metabolic interactions
interactions
24
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Fusion Inhibitor
Fostemsavir
Activity HIV-1
https://www.hiv.uw.edu/go/antiretroviral-therapy/general-information/core-concept/all
25
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Fostemsavir Pharmacology
PK Prodrug, oral → Hydrolysis to temsavir
CYP3A4 metabolism, P-gp substrate → High potential for drug
interactions. Strong CYP3A4 inducers should be avoided.
MOA Binds HIV-1 gp120 envelope adjacent to the gp120-CD4 binding site
→ prevents the gp120 conformational change → prevents
attachment of CD4
Use Treatment of HIV-1 infection in heavily treatment-experienced adults
with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection failing their current ART due
to resistance, intolerance, or safety considerations.
Adverse Nausea (most common)
effects Elevations of hepatic enzymes, esp. in HBV, HCV coinfection
QT interval prolongation
Drug Strong CYP3A4 inducers are contraindicated.
interactions
26
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Post-attachment
inhibitor
Ibalizumab
• I.V. once every 14 days (after loading dose)
• Mechanism:
Monoclonal antibody blocks domain 2

Interferes with post-attachment steps
required for HIV-1 entry into host cells
• Preserves normal immune function
• Heavily treatment-experienced adults
Domain 2 = 2nd extracellular domain
TMB-355 in figure = ibalizumab
http://www.taimedbiologics.com/pipeline/33
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Capsid Inhibitor
Lenacapavir
Lenacapavir directly binds the interface
between capsid protein (p24) subunits in
hexamers, changing its conformation,
which stabilizes it, prevents viral
uncoating, and disrupts the viral lifecycle.
Lenacapravir inhibits HIV-1 replication in
multiple steps by blocking:
• Capsid-mediated nuclear uptake of
proviral DNA
• Virus assembly and release by interfering with Gag/Gag-Pol functioning, which
reduces production of capsid protein subunits.
• Capsid core formation by disrupting the rate of capsid subunit association,
leading to malformed capsids. 28
--- SLIDE 29 ---
Lenacapavir PK, Uses, and Adverse Effects
A Oral initiation  subQ maintenance E Feces, unchanged drug and metabolites
D Protein binding >98% t½ Oral: 10-12 days
Widely distributed – very large Vd subQ: 8-12 weeks
M Complex, including CYP3A Oral and subQ loading dose schedule
Maintenance: subQ once every 6 months
Therapeutic use
• HIV-1 in heavily treatment-experienced adults with multidrug-resistant HIV-
1 infection failing their current antiviral therapy due to resistance,
intolerance, or safety concerns
• Use in combination therapy with other antivirals.
Adverse effects
• Generally well tolerated. Injection site reactions frequently reported
• Contraindication: Concomitant CYP3A4 inducers
29
--- SLIDE 30 ---
Treatment Guidelines
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines
ART is recommended for all people living with HIV
to improve their health and reduce the risk of HIV
transmission to HIV-uninfected sex partners.
--- SLIDE 31 ---
Initial ART (Treatment-Naïve Patients)
2 NRTIs plus an INSTI
Alternatives: an NNRTI or a boosted PI
1. Tenofovir / Emtricitabine
• fixed-dose combination with another ARV
• 3-drugs in one pill, once daily
2. Abacavir with Lamivudine
• For HLA-B*5701-negative patients
 Resistance testing should be used as a guide to selection of an antiviral
regimen in both treatment-naïve and treatment-experienced individuals.
31
--- SLIDE 32 ---
Two-Drug Regimens for Adults with HIV-1
Treatment-naïve patients with no known or
suspected resistance to the individual
Dolutegravir-Lamivudine [Dovato]
components of the drug
Switch from 3-drug to 2-drug regimen as below.
Switch from 3-drug to 2-drug treatment of HIV-
Dolutegravir-Rilpivirine [Juluca]
1 infection in adults who have been
Atazanavir boosted + lamivudine
virologically suppressed on stable ART for at
Darunavir boosted + lamivudine
least 6 months with no treatment failure and no
Darunavir boosted + rilpivirine resistance to the individual components.
Lamivudine-containing regimens are not recommended for patients with HBV
coinfection. Severe acute exacerbation of HBV due to emergence of lamivudine-
resistant HBV variants has been reported.
--- SLIDE 33 ---
Treatment-experienced patients
• Conduct resistance testing
while the patient is taking a failing regimen
• Goals of treatment:
1. To reestablish maximal virologic suppression, with HIV-RNA suppressed
below the limit of detection of a sensitive assay
2. If maximum virologic suppression is not possible, then preserve CD4 cell
count, avoid progression, minimize toxicities
• Select ART with activity against the drug-resistant viral strains
3 active drugs → more sustained response
• Assess adherence frequently and simplify the regimen when
feasible
33
--- SLIDE 34 ---
Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP)
For prevention of HIV-1 infection in adults
who are at very high risk for acquiring HIV
− TDF-Emtricitabine orally daily for
• such as individuals who engage in sexual
men or women (long experience
activity within a high prevalence area or
with this drug)
social network or intravenous drug users
− TAF-Emtricitabine orally daily for
PrEP as part of a comprehensive
adolescents, transgender women,
prevention strategy
and men with bone and renal
• confirm negative HIV-1 test prior to starting
problems who are not eligible for
PrEP
TDF
• reconfirm for HIV-1 infection at least every 6
months while the patient receives PrEP
− Cabotegravir I.M. in gluteal muscle
• comprehensive prevention strategy,
every 2 months for adults (no renal
including the importance of adherence, risk
or lipid monitoring is required)
reduction counselling, ready access to
condoms
34
--- SLIDE 35 ---
Post-Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) for healthcare workers
• Risk of transmission is increased when the source has a high viral
load, the volume is large, and the exposure is deep.
• Preferred: TDF-emtricitabine with dolutegravir or raltegravir
• Alternatives: TDF-emtricitabine with darunavir/r or atazanavir/r
• 4-weeks duration
• Start as soon as possible
• Consultation with a physician who has experience with
antiretroviral drugs is recommended
• Follow-up counseling, post-exposure testing, and medical
evaluation whether or not the HCP received PEP
35
--- SLIDE 36 ---
Transgender People with HIV
• ART is recommended for all transgender people living with HIV to improve their
health and reduce the risk of HIV transmission to HIV-uninfected sex partners.
• HIV care services should be provided within a gender-affirmative care model.
• Prior to ART initiation, a pregnancy test should be performed for individuals of
child-bearing potential.
• Some ARV drugs may have pharmacokinetic interactions with gender-affirming
hormone therapy. Clinical effects and hormone levels should be routinely
monitored with appropriate titrations of estradiol, testosterone, and androgen
blockers as needed.
• Gender-affirming hormone therapies are associated with hyperlipidemia,
elevated cardiovascular risk, and osteopenia. Therefore, clinicians should
choose ART regimens that will not increase the risk of these adverse effects.
36
--- SLIDE 37 ---
Women with HIV (assigned female at birth)
(non-pregnant and using hormonal contraception)
Effects on hormone Transmission, Intrauterine devices
levels: acquisition of HIV: (IUDs):
PIs / NNRTIs are inducers Regardless of hormonal Appear to be a safe and
and/or inhibitors of contraceptive use: effective contraceptive
hormones: • Consistent use of options for HIV-infected
• Inducers  hormone condoms (male or women.
levels → risk of female) during sex
pregnancy • Adhere to an HIV
• Inhibitors  hormone regimen that effectively
levels → risk of toxicities maintains viral
suppression.
--- SLIDE 38 ---
Pregnant People with HIV
Goal: To maintain a viral load below the limit of detection throughout the pregnancy to
reduce transmission to the fetus and newborn.
All HIV-infected pregnant people should receive a combination antepartum
antiretroviral (ARV) drug regimen, regardless of CD4 count or HIV RNA copy number.
Therapy selection considerations ART:
• Extensive experience with the drugs Preferred:
in pregnancy 2-NRTI backbone plus Dolutegravir
• Well tolerated Alternative 3rd drug:
• Good short-term safety profile INSTI: Bictegravir, Raltegravir
PI: Atazanavir, boosted
• PK not significantly altered during
pregnancy NNRTI: Efavirenz, Rilpivirine
• High placental transfer to fetus Others are not recommended due to
limited safety or dosing information.
• No evidence of teratogenicity
38
--- SLIDE 39 ---
Prevention of Intrapartum Mother-to-Child Transmission
Zidovudine I.V. during labor if patient has HIV RNA >1,000 copies/mL
(or unknown HIV RNA) near delivery
Zidovudine is not required for HIV-infected women receiving combination ART
who have HIV RNA ≤1,000 copies/ mL consistently during late pregnancy and
near delivery and no concerns regarding adherence to the regimen.
Unknown HIV status
• Rapid HIV screening test
• If positive, confirmatory testing
• Initiate mother and infant HIV drugs pending results
• If HIV test results are negative, stop infant ARV therapy
39
--- SLIDE 40 ---
Neonate Prophylaxis of infection
Management in the newborn is based on risk of HIV infection and depends on the
mother’s use of antepartum antiretroviral agents and viral load within four weeks
of delivery.
Low risk: Zidovudine (ZDV) x 4 weeks
• Infants 37 weeks gestation; maternal ART 10 weeks and achieved or maintained viral
suppression (<50 copies/mL) for the remainder of the pregnancy and no concerns related to
adherence
Infants that do not meet the above criteria or the high-risk criteria:
ZDV for 4 to 6 weeks
High risk: Presumptive ART from birth for 2 to 6 weeks
ZDV + emtricitabine + nevirapine, or ZDV + emtricitabine + raltegravir
• A newborn whose mother did not receive antepartum drugs or received only intrapartum drugs
or did not have viral suppression within 4 weeks of delivery or had acute or primary HIV during
pregnancy.
40
--- SLIDE 41 ---
Treatment of HIV infection in Pediatric Patients
Preferred: INSTI-based ART regimen
➢ Adherence can be difficult in children and the child’s growth and
development can affect HIV treatment
Not recommended:
• Efavirenz-based regimens, etravirine-based regimens, maraviroc-
based regimens, cabotegravir, 2-drug regimens, and ARV regimens
with low efficacy or with insufficient data.
Breastfeeding
• Mothers with acute or primary HIV infection during breastfeeding should
immediately discontinue breastfeeding.
• There is no consensus on appropriate management of ARV prophylaxis for
infants of individuals with sustained viral suppression who are breastfed.
--- SLIDE 42 ---
Treatment of the Older Patient with HIV
Concerns that may complicate management HIV infection
• Adverse drug events from ART and concomitant drugs may occur more
frequently.
• Greater risk of drug-drug interactions.
• Decline in neurocognitive function with aging is faster in people with HIV than
without HIV.
• Additional medical and social services may be required to effectively manage
both HIV and comorbid conditions.
42
--- SLIDE 43 ---
COMBINATIONS THAT SHOULD NOT BE USED
both are thymidine analogs

Zidovudine + Stavudine in
Antagonism
any regimen
intracellular phosphorylation
of stavudine is inhibited
Didanosine + Stavudine in
Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported
any regimen
Didanosine + Zalcitabine Additive peripheral neuropathy
Both are adenosine analogs

Didanosine + Tenofovir Competition at site of action

High rate of virologic failure
43
--- SLIDE 44 ---
COMBINATIONS THAT SHOULD NOT BE USED
both are cytidine analogs

Lamivudine + Zalcitadine Antagonism
Lamivudine and zalcitabine may inhibit the
intracellular phosphorylation of one another
Emtricitabine is analog of Lamivudine
Lamivudine+Emtricitabine 
Enhanced toxicity
Triple NRTI therapy Suboptimal virologic activity or lack of data
44
--- SLIDE 45 ---
Summary
45
--- SLIDE 46 ---
HIV genome and virion structure.
The HIV-1 genome is shown at the top.
Viral proteins are synthesized as
precursor polyproteins (Gag-Pol [Pr160],
Gag [Pr55], and Env [gp160]), which are
enzymatically processed to yield mature
virion proteins.
Gag-Pol and Gag are cleaved by the viral
protease PR to produce the indicated
smaller proteins.
Env is cleaved by a cellular PR, producing
SU gp120 and TM gp41.
The placements of virion proteins in the
virus particle are indicated by symbols
(bottom of figure).
HIV-2 and SIV lack the vpu gene but
contain a vpx gene.
(Reproduced from Peterlin BM: Molecular biology of HIV. In
Levy JA [editor]. The Viruses. Vol 4: The Retroviridae. Plenum,
1995. Modified there from Luciw PA, Shacklett BL: HIV:
Molecular Organization, Pathogenicity and Treatment. Morrow
WJW, Haigwood NL [editors]. Elsevier, 1993.)
Citation: Chapter 44 AIDS and Lentiviruses, Riedel S, Hobden JA, Miller S, Morse SA, Mietzner TA, Detrick B, Mitchell TG, Sakanari JA, Hotez P, Mejia R. Jawetz, Melnick, &
Adelberg's Medical Microbiology, 28e; 2019, Figure 44-2. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2629&sectionid=217775940 Accessed: April
23, 2024
Copyright © 2024 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
--- SLIDE 47 ---
• NNRTIs are allosteric inhibitors of RT, inhibiting its polymerase activity. They
do not require phosphorylation for activity.
• NNRTI resistance occurs rapidly with monotherapy. Etravirine has a high
barrier to resistance compared to the other NNRTIs and is used for
treatment-experienced patients.
• NNRTIs are associated with skin rash and GI disturbances. Efavirenz,
rilpirivine, and, to a lesser extent, doravirine are associated with
neuropsychiatric adverse effects. Nevirapine is associated with
hepatotoxicity. Risk factors are females with CD4 >250 cells/microL and
males with CD4 >400 cells/microL
• NNRTIs are substrates and inducers/inhibitors of CYPs. There is a high
potential for drug interactions.
47
--- SLIDE 48 ---
• HIV protease inhibitors (PIs) reversibly bind the enzyme, which prevents the
cleavage of the viral polyprotein into reverse transcriptase, protease, integrase,
and structural proteins. This action prevents viral maturation and results in the
production of noninfectious virus.
• Resistance occurs with stepwise accumulation of mutations of the protease
gene, leading to high-level resistance. Suboptimal PI concentrations result in
more rapid appearance of resistant strains.
• PIs are extensively metabolized. They are substrates of CYP3A4 and excreted
in urine as metabolites (very little unchanged drug). They are used with a
pharmacokinetic enhancer (boosted), ritonavir or cobicistat, which are potent
inhibitors of CYP3A4. There is a high potential for drug interactions
• GI adverse effects are common – nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. They cause
hyperglycemia/diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, fat
accumulation in the abdomen and base of the neck and breast enlargement.
• Atazanavir/r and darunavir/r are preferred in the current guidelines due to
improved adverse effect profile, virologic efficacy, and ease of dosing.
48
--- SLIDE 49 ---
Entry inhibitors have diverse actions and effects.
• Maraviroc blocks CCR5 coreceptor that facilitates HIV entry through the host
cell membrane. Viral tropism must be determined prior to initiating maraviroc
therapy. Virologic failure is usually due to presence of CXCR4 coreceptor.
Maraviroc is metabolized by CYP3A4. Therapy adjustments may be required
in the presence of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers. Maraviroc is
generally well tolerated. A concern is severe hepatotoxicity that may be
preceded by a fever or rash. Liver function monitoring is recommended.
• Enfuvirtide a 36-amino acid synthetic peptide with a sequence derived from a
part of the transmembrane gp41 protein of HIV-1. It binds gp41, preventing
conformational change. It is administered by subcutaneous injection twice
daily for treatment-experienced patients. Most adverse effects are related to
the injection including pain, erythema, induration, and nodules, which occur in
almost all patients.
49
--- SLIDE 50 ---
• Fostemsavir oral prodrug is rapidly converted to temsavir, which is an attachment
inhibitor. It binds directly to HIV-1 envelope gp120 near the gp120-CD4 site and
prevents the gp120 conformational change and viral entry. It is for heavily treatment-
experienced adults. CYP3A4 metabolism, half-life ~11 hours (twice daily dose). Strong
CYP3A4 inducers should be avoided. The drug can cause elevations of hepatic
enzymes, especially in patients with HBV, HCV coinfection, and QT interval
prolongation.
• Ibalizumab is a post-attachment inhibitor by binding CD4, which interferes with the post-
attachment steps required for HIV entry into host cells. IV infusion every 2 weeks for
treatment of heavily ARV-experienced HIV-1 infected adults as part of a regimen of
other potentially active agents whenever possible. It may cause dizziness, diarrhea,
nausea, rash.
• Lenacapavir is a capsid inhibitor the interferes with several steps in the viral replication
process used in combination with other ARVs for heavily treatment-experienced
patients. It is generally well tolerated. Injection site reactions are frequent. Concomitant
CYP3A4 inducers are contraindicated.
50
--- SLIDE 51 ---
Illustration by Michela Buttignol for Verywell Health
51
--- SLIDE 52 ---
References
• NIH HIV information: https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2022:
Chapters 64: Antiretroviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection
• Access Medicine Katzung & Vanderah’s, Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 15e, 2021: Chapter
49: Antiviral Agents
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 21e, 2023; Chapter 202: Human
Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders
• Access Medicine Sherris Medical Microbiology, 8e, 2023; Chapter 18: Human Retroviruses
• Lexicomp monographs May 2023
• UpToDate, various, literature review current through Apr 2023
52
--- SLIDE 53 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R